Some more abstract, theoretic treatment of this method can be found in [[Green's Function]].

---
This method mainly relies on an "extension of scalers" style enlargement of solution space to solve inhomogeneous ODE. In general given a [[Linear ODE]] of the form $$Lx(t)=f(t)\quad\text{where}\quad L= a_n(t)\frac{d^n}{dt^n} + a_{n-1}(t)\frac{d^{n-1}y}{dt^{n-1}} + \cdots+a_0(t)$$we first calculate its fundamental set of solutions $\phi_i$ for its homogeneous version $Lx=0$, and then set $\phi_p=\sum c_i\phi_i$ where $c_i:\mathbb R\to\mathbb R$ is a differentiable function. Now notice that by assuming $$\sum_{i=1}^nc_i'\phi_i^{(j)}=0,\quad\forall 0\le j\le n-2\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\begin{cases}\phi_p^{(j)}=\sum_{i=1}^nc_i\phi_i^{(j)},&0\le j\le n-1\\\phi_p^{(n)}=\sum_{i=1}^nc_i'\phi_i^{(n-1)}+\sum_{i=1}^nc_i\phi_i^{(n)}\end{cases}$$We can plug $\phi$ into the original DE and get $$L\phi_p=f\quad\iff\quad\sum_{i=1}^nc_i'\phi_i^{(n-1)}=\frac{f}{a_n}$$The above $n$ equations, combined together, forms a linear system for $c_i'$, hence by Cramer's rule ([[Solving Linear System]]) we have $$c_i'(t)=\frac{W_i(t)}{W(t)},\quad1\le i\le n$$Hence a particular solution can be calculated via $$\phi_p(t)=\sum_{i=1}^n\phi_i(t)\int\frac{W_i(t)}{W(t)}dt$$An IVP can be further solved by definite integral.
- **Variation of parameters for [[Linear ODE System]]**: for a system $x'=Ax+b$ with fundamental matrix $\Phi$, set $\phi_p=\Phi c$ with $c:\mathbb R\to\mathbb R^n$, then $\Phi'=A\Phi$ by definition. Plugging it back we get $$\Phi'c+\Phi c'=A\Phi c+b\quad\Longrightarrow\quad c'=\Phi^{-1}b\quad\Longrightarrow\quad c(t)=\int\Phi^{-1}(t)b(t)dt$$thus the particular solution is of the form $$\phi_p(t)=\Phi(t)\int\Phi^{-1}(t)b(t)dt$$considering the initial value $x(t_0)=x_0$ a general solution can be written as $$x(t)=\Phi(t)\Phi^{-1}(t_0)x_0+\Phi(t)\int_{t_0}^t\Phi^{-1}(s)b(s)ds$$
## Connection with Green's function method
We claim the the method of variation of parameter is essentially equivalent to [[Green's Function]] method. More specifically: 
- **VOP is constructive and local**: it constructs a particular solution for a single $f$ by integrating combinations of fundamental solutions against $f$.
- **Green's function is more global and operator-theoretic**: instead of solving for a particular solution, it compute once the inverse kernel $G$ (which depends only on $L$ and the BC). Then for any right-hand side $f$ you just integrate $G(\cdot,s)f(s)$ to get the solution. So Green’s function is the “universal” VoP output.