A linear covering of a vector space $V$ is a set of proper subspaces $\set{W_i}$ such that $V=\bigcup W_i$. A well known result is the **avoidance lemma** in linear algebra: any "ordinary" vector space cannot be covered by finite set of proper subspace. Below we generalize this result.
- **(Irredundant) linear covering number**: $LC(V)$ denotes the linear covering number, i.e., the least cardinality of a linear covering, while $ILC$ denotes the irredundant linear covering number, i.e., the least cardinality of a linear covering $\set{W_i}_{i\in I}$ s.t. $\bigcup_{i\in J}W_i\neq V,\forall J\subsetneq I$. Obviously $LC(V)\le ILC(V)$.
- **Covering lemma**: given vector space $V$ on filed $K$, if at least one of $\dim V$ and $|K|$ is finite then $LC(V)=\#K+1$; otherwise $LC(V)=\aleph_0$. In all cases $ILC(V)=\#K+1$.
  **Proof**: we utilize the lemmas below. For $ILC$, given $\dim V\ge2$, by 3, $ILC(V)\ge\#K+1$, and by 1 and the quotient principle we have $ILC(V)\le\#K+1$, hence $ILC(V)=\#K+1$. For $LC$, if $\dim V<\aleph_0$, we have $LC(V)\ge\#K+1$ by 2, and $LC(V)\le LC(K^2)=\#K+1$ by quotient principle, hence $LC(V)=\#K+1$; if $\dim V\ge\aleph_0$ and $\#K<\infty$ then $LC(V)<\aleph_0$ by the quotient principle, and if $LC(V)<\#K+1$ we may remove some subspaces to get a ILC, contradicting the above result; if $\dim V\ge\aleph_0$ and $\#K=\infty$ the above still applies.
	1. $\dim V=2$: given any $K$ on $K^2$ there are $\#K+1$ lines passing through the origin, and any $x\in K^2$ belongs to one of the lines (because any element in a field is invertible). This is the unique linear covering, hence $LC(K^2)=ILC(K^2)=|K|+1$.
	2. $3\le\dim V<\infty$ for $LC$: we use induction to show that $LC(V)\ge\#K+1$. $\dim V=2$ is already in 1; given the result in $\dim V=k-1$, if there is a linear covering $\#\set{W_i}<\#K+1$, then we can pick another co-dimension 1 space $W\neq W_i$, and $\set{W_i\cap W}$ will be a covering of $W$, which yields a contradiction. 
	3. $3\le \dim V<\infty$ for $ILC$: by irredundancy we pick $u\in W_1\backslash\bigcup_{i\neq1} W_i$ and $v\in V\backslash W_1$. The line $\ell=\set{u+kv:k\in K}$ satisfies $\#\ell=\#K$, and $\#(\ell\cap W_i)\le1$, otherwise $u\in W_i$. It follows that $\#K=\#\ell\le ILC(V)-1$.
	- **Quotient principle**: if $\dim V\le\dim W$, then $LC(V)\ge LC(W)$ and $ILC(V)\ge ILC(W)$, since any $\bigcup V_i=V$ naturally yields a covering by $\bigcup\pi^{-1}(V_i)=W$ where $\pi$ is the projection. Note that we cannot argue the converse, since there is no guarantee that no element will be mapped to $V$ itself.
- **Geometric intuition**: WLOG assume that each subspace has dimension $\dim V-1$, then each $W_i$ could be illustrated by a plane passing through the origin, and then goal is to prove that the space cannot be fully covered by these planes. If we pick $\alpha\in W_1$ and consider the quotient space $\set{\alpha+ W_1^\perp}_{\alpha\in W_1}$, then each other $W_i$ can intersects with at most $\dim V-2$ linearly independent elements, since $$\alpha+\beta_1,\alpha+\beta_2\in W_i\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\beta_2-\beta_1\in W_i\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\alpha\in W_i$$while there are infinitely many $\alpha\in W_1$, hence the result is obvious.