This note contains some basic treatment of polynomial. More algebraic results can be found in [[Polynomial over a Field]]; formal definition and structural treatment of polynomial can be found in [[Polynomial Ring]]. We'll assume the field to be $\mathbb C$ unless stated. We denote $\mathbb P_n=\set{\deg p\le n}$.
## Polynomial of single variable
- **Fundamental theorem of algebra**: Any polynomial $\deg P_n=n$ has exactly $n$ roots in $\mathbb C$. This is a simple corollary of the Rouché theorem. [[Geometry of Holomorphic Function]]
- **Continuity of zeros**: given a polynomial $p(z)$ with $n$ roots $z_i$, for any $\varepsilon>0$ there exists $\delta>0$ s.t. all roots of $p(z)+\sum\Delta a_nz^n$ lie within $B_\varepsilon(z_i)$.
  **Proof via complex analysis**: from [[Geometry of Holomorphic Function]] by Rouché's theorem we know that the number of zeros within some $U$ is $$N_U(p)=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{\partial U}\frac{p(z)}{p'(z)}dz$$pick $U_i=B_\varepsilon(z_i)$ for any root $z_i$, then it's obvious that we can always pick $\delta>0$ small enough such that $N_{U_{i}}(p(z)+\sum\Delta a_nz^n)=1$ for any $\max\Delta a_n<\delta$.
	- **An faulty objection**: could it be the case that at some point two roots $z_i\neq z_j$ suddenly exchange their positions? This violates the continuity, but still keeps $N_U(p)$ constant.
	  **Rebuttal**: the roots of a polynomial are symmetric in their standings, and there is no canonical ways to label them, hence the expectation that they would vary continuously in labelled order itself is meaningless. More generally, the symmetric group acts transitively on the labels of the roots, and continuity only applies to the _set_ of roots, not individual ones. [[Group Actions]]
	- **Topological view**: denote $\xi=(\xi_i)$ the vector of roots, then $a_i=\sigma_i(\xi)$ ([[Polynomial Ring]]). Define a equivalence relation $\xi\sim\beta$ if $\beta$ is a permutation of $\xi$, and define $$\hat\sigma:\mathbb C^n/\sim\to\mathbb C^n,\quad\hat\sigma=\sigma\circ\pi$$where $\pi:\mathbb C^n/\sim\to\mathbb C^n$ the canonical projection, then $\hat\sigma$ is a homeomorphism.
	  **Proof**: define a metric $d$ on $\mathbb C^n/\sim$ by $$d(\pi(\xi),\pi(\beta))=\min_{J\in S_n}\max_{i\in[n]}|\xi_i-\beta_{J(i)}|$$then $\pi$ is continuous if $\mathbb C^n/\sim$ is endowed with the topology induced by $d$ ([[Metric Topology]]). Moreover
	- **Interesting fact**: on $\mathbb C$ simple zero is a $C^\infty$ function of coefficients.
- **Euclidean's algorithm**: see [[Euclidean Domain]]. 
	- **Bézout's identity**: given $f(x),g(x)$ there exists $u(x),v(x)$ s.t. $$u(x)f(x)+v(x)g(x)=(f(x),g(x))$$the polynomial coefficients can be derived from the Euclidean algorithm. To find the $u,v$ we consider the process (take $f(x)=x^4-x^3-4x^2+4x+1,g(x)=x^2-x-1$): $$\begin{array} {c|ccccc|ccc|c}&&&f(x)&&&&g(x)\\ & x^4 & -x^3 & -4x^2 & +4x & +1 & x^2 & -x & -1 & \\ x^2 & x^4 & -x^2 & -x^2 & & & & & & \\ \hline & & & -3x^2 & +4x & +1 & & & & \\ -3 & & & -3x^2 & +3x & +3 & & & & \\ \hline & & & & x & -2 & & & & \\ & & & & & & x^2 & -2x & & x \\ \hline & & & & & & & x & -1 & \\  & & & & & & & x & -2 & 1\\ \hline & & & & & & & & 1 &\end{array}$$Now by backward replacement we immediately know that $$\begin{align}1&=g(x)-(x+1)(x-2)\\&=g(x)-(x+1)(f(x)-(x^2-3)g(x))\\&=-(x+1)f(x)+(x^3+x^2-3x-2)g(x)\end{align}$$This is basically a application of Euclidean algorithm.
- **Polynomial factorization**: we can write $f(x)=p_1^{k_1}(x) \dots p_s^{k_s}(x)$ where each $p_k$ is irreducible. 
	- $p_i^{k_i}\mid f\Rightarrow p_i^{k_i-1}\mid f'$
	- **Repeated roots**: for $f\in\mathbb K[x]$, if $(x-a)^k\|(f,f')$, then $a$ is a repeated root of order $k+1$.
		- Although for $f(x)=\prod(x-x_k)$ we have $f'(x)=f(x)\sum\frac{1}{x-x_k}$, it's not always the case that $(x-x_0)^k\mid f'\Rightarrow (x-x_0)^{k+1}\mid f$, since integration adds an extra constant term.
	- We can reduce the order of all irreducible factors to $1$ by $$p_1(x)p_2(x) \dots p_s(x) = \frac{f(x)}{(f(x),f'(x))}$$
### Irreducible polynomial on $\mathbb Q$
Given a polynomial $f=\sum a_nx^n\in\mathbb Z[x]$, define its **content** as $(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$ and its **primitive part** as $f/(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$.
- **Gauss' lemma**: product of primitive polynomials is primitive.
  **Proof**: given $f=\sum a_nx^n,g=\sum b_mx^m\in\mathbb Z[x]$ primitive, if there exists $p\in\mathbb P$ that divides all the coefficients of $fg$, then by primitivity we can pick $s<\deg f,t<\deg g$ s.t. $$\begin{align}&p\not\mid a_s\quad\text{while}\quad p\mid a_i,\quad\forall 0\le i<s\\&p\not\mid b_t\quad\text{while}\quad p\mid b_j,\quad\forall 0\le j<t\end{align}$$now consider the coefficient $x^{s+t}$ term in $fg$, then it's obvious that $$\sum_{i+j=s+t}a_ib_j\equiv a_{s}b_t\not\equiv0\pmod{p}$$which is a contradiction.
	- **Corollary**: if primitive $f$ can be decomposed into $f=gh\in\mathbb Q[x]\times\mathbb Q[x]$, then we can pick proper coefficients s.t. $g,h\in\mathbb Z[x]$. To see this, we pick $C_1,C_2\in\mathbb Q$ such that $C_1g,C_2h$ are primitive, then $$C_1C_2f=(C_1g)(C_2h)$$must also be primitive , but this contradicts the primitivity of $f$.  
	- **Generalization**: the key property we used in the above proof is that $\mathbb Z$ is a UFD. 
- **Eisenstein's criterion**: given $f\in\mathbb Z[x],p/q\in\mathbb Q$, if $f(p/q)=0$ we must have $p\mid a_0,q\mid a_n$.
## Polynomial of several variables
A general polynomial $p\in\mathbb P_n$ with several variables takes the form $$\quad p(x)=\sum_{|\alpha|\le n}x^\alpha$$Such space will be denoted $\mathbb P_n(\mathbb R^d)$ if there are $d$ different variables. Obviously we have that $$\dim\mathbb P_n(\mathbb R^d)=\binom{n+d}{d}$$