A **congruence system** is a system of congruence equations of the form $$f(x)\equiv 0\pmod m$$where $f:\mathbb Z^s\to\mathbb Z^t$ is an [[Arithmetic Function]], and $m=(m_1,\cdots,m_t)$ the modulus vector. Below we'll investigate some special kinds of congruence systems.
- **Number of solutions**: below we'll denote the number of solutions to the above congruence system as $\rho(f,m)$.
## Linear congruence system
In this section we're interested in the solution to the linear congruence system $$x\equiv a_i\pmod{m_i},\quad1\le i\le k$$which can be fully solved via the [[Chinese Remainder Theorem]] (CRT). Below we go through its original and generalized version. [[Ring]]-theoretic generalization can be found in [[Ideal]]. 
- **CRT**: given $m_i\in\mathbb Z_+$ pairwise coprime ([[Division]]), denote $m=m_1\cdots m_k$, then the solution to the above system is unique up to modulo $m$, given by $$x\equiv\sum_{i=1}^k a_i\overline M_iM_i\pmod{m}\quad\text{where}\quad M_i=\frac{m}{m_i},\quad\overline M_i\equiv M_i^{-1}\pmod{m_i}$$**Proof**: on one hand, it can be easily verified that $x$ given above indeed solves the system. On the other hand, given two solutions $x_1,x_2$ we have $$x_1-x_2\equiv0\pmod{m_i}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad m_i\mid x_1-x_2,\quad\forall 1\le i\le k$$since $m_i$ are pairwise coprime, we have $m\mid x_1-x_2$ by [[Division]].
- **Generalized CRT**: given $m_i\in\mathbb Z_+$ not necessarily pairwise coprime and let $m=[m_1,\cdots,m_k]$, then the linear system above has solution iff $$(m_i,m_j)\mid a_i-a_j,\quad\forall i\neq j$$in which case the solution is unique up to modulo $m$.
  **Proof**: we first prove the existence criterion. For $\Rightarrow$ we have $$x=k_im_i+a_i=k_jm_j+a_j\quad\Longrightarrow\quad a_i-a_j=k_jm_j-k_im_i$$and RHS is divisible by $(m_i,m_j)$, hence so is LHS. For $\Leftarrow$, denote $p_1,\cdots,p_r,r=\omega(m)$ ([[Division]]) all the prime factors of $m$, and denote the prime factorization of each $m_i$ as $$m_i=\prod_{l=1}^rp_l^{\alpha_{il}},\quad\forall1\le i\le k$$then by [[Modular Arithmetic]] the original system is equivalent to $$x\equiv a_i\pmod{p_l^{\alpha_{il}}},\quad\forall 1\le i\le k,1\le l\le r$$For a specific $l$, by the condition $(m_i,m_j)\mid a_i-a_j$ we have the implication $$x\equiv a_{il}\pmod{p_l^{\alpha_{il}}}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad x\equiv a_{jl}\pmod{p_l^{\alpha_{jl}}},\quad\forall \alpha_{jl}\le\alpha_{il}$$hence removing unnecessary equations, the system can be further reduced to $$x\equiv a_{i(l)}\pmod{p_l^{\beta_l}},\quad\forall 1\le l\le r\quad\text{where}\quad\beta_l=\max\set{\alpha_{il}:1\le i\le k}$$here $i(l)\in[k]$ is the index that satisfies $\alpha_{i(l),l}=\beta_l$. To this point we can apply CRT to yield the existence of solution. Uniqueness up to modulo $m$ also follows immediately.
## Congruence system with prime power modulus
Given $m=p_1^{\alpha_1}\cdots p_r^{\alpha_r}$, by [[Division]] we have the equivalence $$f(x)\equiv0\pmod m\quad\iff\quad f(x)\equiv 0\pmod{p_i^{\alpha_i}},\quad\forall 1\le i\le r$$hence by CRT a congruence system with a general modulus $m$ is reduced to one with prime power modulus. Further, we have that $$\rho(f,m)=\prod_{i=1}^r\rho(f,p_i^{\alpha_i})$$as an direct corollary by property of [[Modular Arithmetic]].
