A **contour** is a directed curve on $\mathbb C$ made up of a finite sequence of directed [[Smooth Curve]] whose endpoints are matched to give a single direction. Given $\gamma=\gamma(t),t\in[a,b]$ a parametrized smooth contour, the **contour integral** of a [[Complex Function]] $f:\mathbb C\to\mathbb C$ over $\gamma$ is defined as $$\int_\gamma f(z)dz=\int_a^b f(z(t))z'(t)dt$$We may also use $f(z)=u+iv$ and $dz=dx+idy$ and treat the above as a path integral. 
- **Fundamental theorem of contour integral**: if $f$ is holomorphic in an open simply connected region $U$, and $\gamma$ is a curve in $U$ from $z_0$ to $z_1$, then $$\int_\gamma f'(z)dz=f(z_1)-f(z_0)$$Its global existence it justified by the following Cauchy-Goursat theorem.
	- For $\gamma(t)=re^{it},0\le t\le2\pi$ we have $\int_\gamma z^n=0$ for all $n\neq-1$ and $2\pi i$ for $n=-1$.
	- We have the following integral inequality $$\left|\int_\gamma fdz\right|\le\int_\gamma|f||d\gamma|,\quad|d\gamma|=|\gamma'(t)|dt$$which can be proven by rotating the integral onto real axis. As a corollary, if $|f|\le M$ then we have $\left|\int_\gamma fdz\right|\le M|\gamma|$. 
	- **Winding index**: for any $c\in\mathbb C$ and continuous closed path $\gamma\subset \mathbb C\backslash\set{c}$, we have that $$\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\gamma\frac{dz}{z-c}\in\mathbb Z$$This is because the primitive of $\frac{1}{z-c}$ is a branch of $\log z$, thus the integral is exactly the difference of two different branches at the same point ([[Complex Function]]). We call it the winding index of $\gamma$ w.r.t $c$, denoted $\operatorname{wind}(\gamma,c)$ or $I(\gamma,c)$.
## Application in evaluating Riemann integrals
Using [[Cauchy Integral]] and [[Residue]] theorem contour integral can be used in the evaluation of real integrals. Several examples are listed below:
- **Polynomial numerator $\int_\mathbb R\frac{1}{(x^2+1)^2}$**: take $C$ the upper-semicircle together with $(-r,0)\to(r,0)$, then by Cauchy's integral formula we have $$\int_C\frac{dz}{(z^2+1)^2}=\int_C\frac{\frac{1}{(z+i)^2}}{(z-i)^2}dz=2\pi i\left.\frac{d}{dz}\frac{1}{(z+i)^2}\right|_i=\frac{\pi}{2}$$Or we can also use the residue theorem, noticing that $i$ is a pole of order $2$, to calculate the same result. Meanwhile, since $$\left|\frac{1}{(z^2+1)^2}\right|\cdot\pi r\le\frac{\pi r}{(r^2-1)^2}\to0,\quad r\to\infty$$This yields the result.
	- **Coincidence in form between two methods**: it can be observed that in the example evaluating the contour integral using integral formula and residue theorem only influence the order of differentiation and following calculation. This is mainly because the integrand is exactly a polynomial - when it's not we could only invoke residue theorem.
- **Trigonometric integral $\int_{-\pi}^\pi\frac{dt}{1+3\cos^2 t}$**: since $\cos t=(e^{it}+e^{-it})/2$, denote $z=e^{i\theta}$, and take $C$ being the unit circle, then $$\int_{-\pi}^\pi\frac{dt}{1+3\cos^2 t}=\int_C\frac{1}{1+\frac{3}{4}(z+\frac{1}{z})^2}\frac{dz}{iz}=-4i\int_C\frac{zdz}{3z^4+10z^2+3}$$The rest is similar as the first example.
- **Exponential & trigonometric integral $\int_0^{2\pi} e^{\cos\theta}\cos(\sin\theta)d\theta$**: set $z=e^{i\theta}$ and $C$ the unit circle, $$\int_0^{2\pi}e^{\cos\theta}\cos(\sin\theta)d\theta=\int_Ce^{\Re z}\frac{e^{i\Im z}+e^{-i\Im z}}{2}\frac{dz}{iz}=\frac{1}{2i}\int_C\frac{1}{z}(e^z+e^{\overline z})dz$$since $|z|=1$ we have $\overline z=1/z$, and the rest is a simple application of residue theorem.
	- **Dealing with $\overline z$**: in the above case we have $|z|=1$, hence we can replace $\overline z=1/z$ to transform the integrand into a meromorphic one. In general cases we can consider to invoke Laurent series, introduce parametrization $z=z(t)$, utilize Stokes' theorem for complex variable ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]), or write $dz=dx+idy$ and evaluate each coordinate separately.
## Useful formulas
- **Jensen's formula**: for $f$ holomorphic on a closed disk $\overline{D_r}=\set{|z|\le r}$ with $f(0)\neq0$, denote  $\set{z_n}$ the set of roots of $f$ within the disk (counted with multiplicities), then $$\ln|f(0)|=\sum_n\ln\frac{|z_n|}{r}+\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi}\ln|f(re^{i\theta})|d\theta$$**Proof**: by change of variable $z'=cz$ we can reduce to $r=1$, and obviously the formula for $f_1f_2$ follows from $f_1$ and $f_2$. Thus only two cases are left for proof: $f$ non-vanishing and $f=z-z_0$. For non-vanishing $f$ we know that $f=e^g$ ([[Zero of Holomorphic Function]]), and by mean value property of [[Harmonic function]] we have $$\ln|f(0)|=\ln|\exp(g(0))|=\Re g(0)=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi}\Re g(e^{i\theta})d\theta=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi}\ln|f(e^{i\theta})|d\theta$$For $f=z-z_0$ the formula can be directly verified by considering  $\theta\to-\theta$ and use a similar reasoning as above. This can be seen as a generalization of the mean value property.
	- **Proof via Blaschke factor**: notice that that basic factors $z-z_0$ can be replaced by $\psi_\alpha(z)=\frac{\alpha-z}{1-\overline\alpha z}$ since $f/(\psi_1\cdots\psi_n)$ is also non-vanishing. This makes the proof easier since $|\psi_\alpha(e^{i\theta})|=1$ for all $\theta\in[0,2\pi]$.
	- **Variant**: let $n(r)=|\set{z_n}\cap B_r|$, then since $$-\int_0^r\frac{n(x)dx}{x}=\sum_n\ln|z_n|$$which can be proofed using characteristic function, we can replace the summation term with the integral to get a variant of Jensen's formula.
- **Useful identities**: for $f$ holomorphic on some disk $D_R$, notice that any $f(z)z^n,n\in\mathbb N$ is also holomorphic, hence $0=\int_{C_R}f(z)z^ndz=iR^{n+1}\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})e^{i(n+1)\theta}$, i.e. $$\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})e^{in\theta}=0,\quad\forall n\ge1$$If $f(0)=0$, then $f(z)z^{-1}$ is also holomorphic, hence similarly we have $\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})=0$.
	- **Combination with Cauchy's formula**: taking conjugate in the above identities yields $\int_0^{2\pi}\overline{f(Re^{i\theta})}e^{-in\theta}=0,\forall n\ge1$. On the other hand [[Cauchy Integral]] says that $\frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}=\frac{1}{2\pi R^n}\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})e^{-in\theta}d\theta$, hence adding them together yields $$\frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}=\frac{1}{\pi R^n}\int_0^{2\pi}u(Re^{i\theta})e^{-in\theta}d\theta$$which is a bound of derivatives by the real part.