**Motivation**: as it turns out, holomorphicity ([[Complex Function]]) over complex plane is so strong that $f\in\mathcal O(D),D\subset\mathbb C$ generally exhibits great geometric behaviors. Below we'll mainly separate two different categories: **non-critical** and **critical points** of holomorphic functions, discussing their geometric properties respectively. 
## Non-critical points: conformity
A map $f:U\to\mathbb R^n,U\subset\mathbb R^n$ is said to be **conformal (angle-preserving)** at $u_0\in U$ if it preserves angles between directed curves through $u_0$, as well as preserving **orientation**. 
- **Holomorphic function is conformal at non-critical points**: consider $f\in\mathcal O(D)$ where $D\subset\mathbb C$ is a domain. For any $z_0\in D$ with $f'(z_0)'\neq0$, $f$ is conformal at $z_0$. 
  **Proof**: take $\gamma_1(t),\gamma_2(t)$ two regular [[Smooth Curve]] with $\gamma_1(0)=\gamma_2(0)=z_0$ having non-zero tangent vectors at the point, then the angle between them at $z_0$ is $$\theta=\arg\left(\gamma_1'(0)\cdot\overline{\gamma_2'(0)}\right)$$Denote $\tilde\gamma_i=f\circ\gamma_i,i=1,2$, then by analyticity and chain rule ([[Complex Function]]) we have $$\tilde\gamma_i'(0)=f'(z_0)\cdot\gamma_i'(0),\quad i=1,2$$here we used the fact that $f'(z_0)\neq0$. Now by plugging this into the angle formula we get $$\tilde\theta=\arg\left(\tilde\gamma_1'(0)\cdot\overline{\tilde\gamma_2'(0)}\right)=\arg\left(|f'(z_0)|^2\cdot\gamma_1'(0)\cdot\gamma_2'(0)\right)=\theta$$which implies that the angle is preserved, hence $f$ is conformal at $z_0$. 
- **Conformal map is holomorphic**: given $f:D\to\mathbb C$ being conformal, we have $f\in\mathcal O(D)$. 
  **Proof**: conformity implies that $f$ can be locally approximated by a linear function, which further implies differentiability at each point. This is, by [[Complex Function]], equivalent to the statement that $f\in\mathcal O(D)$. 
## Critical points: argument principle
Let $f\in\mathcal O(B(c,r)\backslash\set{c})$ with $f(c)=0$ a zero of order $n$ ([[Zero of Holomorphic Function]]), then $$\frac{d}{dz}\ln f(z)=\frac{f'(z)}{f(z)}=\frac{n(z-c)^{n-1}\phi(z)+(z-c)^n\phi'(z)}{(z-c)^n\phi(z)}=\frac{n}{z-c}+a_1+a_2(z-c)\cdots$$thus for simple curve $\gamma$ surrounding $B(c,r)$ small enough, the **logarithmic residue** satisfies $$\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\gamma\frac{d}{dz}\ln f(z)dz=n$$Similarly for $c$ being a pole the residue equals negative order of the pole. Let $N,P$ denote number of zeros and poles within $G$, then by Cauchy's residue theorem ([[Cauchy Integral]]) we have the **argument principle** $$N-P=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\partial G}\frac{f'(z)}{f(z)}dz$$Note that the number is counted as many times as their orders. 
- **Generalization**: with Cauchy's integral formula ([[Cauchy Integral]]) we have $$\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\partial G}g(z)\frac{f'(z)}{f(z)}dz=\sum_{k=1}^lg(z_k)-\sum_{k=1}^mg(p_k)$$where $g$ is holomorphic in $\overline G$. The summation is also taken through all orders.
- **Explicit argument principle**: denote the increment of $\arg f$ along $\partial G$ as $\Delta_{\partial G}\arg f$, then $$N-P=\frac{1}{2\pi}\Delta_{\partial G}\arg f$$This follows directly from conclusions above and $\operatorname{Ln}f=\ln|f|+i\operatorname{Arg}f$ ([[Complex Function]]). Notice that we also have $\frac{1}{2\pi}\Delta_{\partial G}\arg f=I(\partial G,0)$ the winding number, hence another more intuitive view is to consider the path of $f(z)$ as $z$ winds through $\partial G$.
- **Rouché's theorem**: Let $f,g$ be holomorphic in closed domain $\overline G$ with continuous , and let $$|f(z)|>|g(z)|,\quad\forall z\in\partial G$$then $f$ and $f+g$ have the same number of zeros in $G$. To see this, for any loop $\Gamma$ we have $$v(f(\Gamma),0)=v([f+g](\Gamma),0)$$hence the result follows directly from the argument principle.
	- **Symmetric version**: we can actually rewrite the condition to $$|f(z)-g(z)|<|f(z)|+|g(z)|,\quad\forall z\in\partial G$$The same intuition applies here. 
### Open mapping theorem
**Open mapping theorem**: if $f$ holomorphic on domain $D$ is not equal identically to a constant, then $f$ is a open map, i.e., the image $D^*=f(D)$ is also a domain. 
**Proof**: $D^*$ is trivially connected by continuity. For openness, given any pair $f(z_0)=w_0$, we pick a disk $G=\set{z:|z-z_0|\le r}\subset D$ s.t. $z_0$ is the only $w_0$-point in $G$, which is possible since zeros are isolated (by the identity principle in [[Zero of Holomorphic Function]]). By compactness of $\partial G$ we can pick the distance ([[Metric Topology]]) $$\mu=\min_{z\in\partial G}|f(z)-\omega_0|>0$$Set $K=\set{\omega:|\omega-\omega_0|<\mu}$, then it suffice to show $K\subset D^*$. Pick any $\omega_1\in K$, then we have $$f(z)-\omega_1=f(z)-\omega_0+(\omega_0-\omega_1)$$Moreover, $|f(z)-\omega_0|\ge\mu$ on $\partial G$. Since $|\omega_0-\omega_1|<\mu$, Rouché theorem implies that $f(z)-\omega_1$ and $f(z)-\omega_0$ have the same number of roots within $G$, meaning that $f(z)$ takes the value $\omega_1$, hence $\omega_1\in K$. By arbitrary-ness of $\omega_1$ we know that $D^*$ is open.
- **Counterintuitive examples** 
	- **Correspondence of boundary**: although $f(D)$ must also be a domain, there is no guarantee that $\partial D$ will be mapped bijectively to $\partial f(D)$, say, the boundary may be "attached" to each other or even "covered" to become an interior, like $e^z$ on $\set{z:\Re z\in(0,1),\Im z\in(0,4\pi)}$.
	- **Simply connected domain**: image of a simply connected domain may not be simply connected when $f$ is not injective, say the half-annulus $\set{1<|z|<2,\arg z\in(0,\pi)}$ under $z^3$ is the entire annulus $\set{1<|z|<8}$.
- **Local inverse**: condition $f'(z_0)\neq0$ is necessary and sufficient for the local invertibility of a holomorphic function $f$ at the point $z_0$. Sufficiency follows from the inverse function theorem ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]), while necessity is trivial. 
- **Maximum modulus principle**: if $f$ holomorphic in $D$ and its modulus $|f|$ achieves its (local) maximum at $z_0\in D$, then $f$ is constant. This follows from the open mapping theorem.
	- For function $f$ holomorphic in $D$ and continuous on $\partial D$, $|f|$ always achieves its maximum on $\partial D$. As a corollary, for polynomial $P_n(z)$ of degree $n$ let $$M(r)=\sup_{|z|=r}|P_n(z)|$$then $M(r)$ is increasing and $M(r)/r^n$ is decreasing.
	- A similar statement is that, any non-vanishing holomorphic function that attains a (local) minimum must be constant.
- **Schwarz lemma**: let $f$ be holomorphic in unit disk $D=\set{|z|<1}$ satisfying $|f(z)|\le1$ for all $z\in D$ and $f(0)=0$, then $|f(z)|\le|z|$ for all $z\in D$. Moreover, if the equality holds for at least one $z\neq0$ then it holds everywhere in $D$ and in this case $f(z)=e^{i\alpha}z,\alpha\in\mathbb R$.
  **Proof**: let $\phi(z)=f(z)/z$ and apply the maximum modulus principle. For the second part apply the open mapping principle.
	- **Proof via Cauchy's formula**: notice that $$f'(0)=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{|\xi|=r}\frac{f(\xi)-f(-\xi)}{\xi^2}d\xi$$hence the result follows from triangle inequality.
	- **Corollary**: given any disk $U_\rho=\set{z:|z-z_0|<\rho}$ centered at $z_0$ and holomorphic $f$ such that $|f(z)-f(z_0)|<M$, then we may construct a normalized mapping $$g(\xi)=\frac{f(z_0+\xi\rho)-f(z_0)}{M}\quad\text{where}\quad\xi=\frac{z-z_0}{\rho}$$which satisfies the conditions for Schwarz lemma, thus we have $$|f(z)-f(z_0)|\le\frac{M}{\rho}|z-z_0|,\quad\forall z\in U_\rho$$
	- **Converging mapping**: given $\phi:\Omega\to\Omega$ for some bounded open $\Omega$, if there exists $z_0\in\Omega$ s.t. $f(z_0)=z_0,f'(z_0)=1$, then $\phi(z)=z$.
	  **Proof**: WLOG assume that $z_0=0$. Let $\phi(z)=z+a_nz^n+O(z^{n+1})$, then notice that $$\phi_k=\phi\circ\cdots\circ\phi=z+ka_nz^n+O(z^{n+1})$$Now apply Cauchy's inequality and let $k\to\infty$ would yields $a_n=0$.
## Riemann mapping theorem
A conformal bijective map of $D_1$ onto $D_2$ is said to be a **conformal isomorphism**, and $D_1,D_2$ that admit such a map are **isomorphic** (or **conformally equivalent**). When $D_1=D_2$ it's called a **conformal automorphism**.
- Conformal automorphisms forms a group under composition. Thus any isomorphism is a composition of a fixed isomorphism and a automorphism.
- Any conformal automorphism of a canonical domain ($\mathbb C/\overline{\mathbb C}/\mathbb D=\set{|z|<1}$) is a FL transform.
  **Proof**: for $\phi\in\aut(\overline{\mathbb C})$ there is exactly one $z_0$ that is mapped to infinite, and since function with any higher order pole cannot be bijective, we must have $\phi=\frac{A}{z-z_0}+B$, or $\phi=Az+b$ when $z_0=\infty$. For $\phi\in\aut(\mathbb C)$ the reasoning is similar.
  For $\phi\in\aut(\mathbb D)$ denote $\omega_0=\phi(0)$ and define $$\lambda:\quad\omega\to\frac{\omega-\omega_0}{1-\overline\omega_0\omega}$$The composition $f=\lambda\circ\phi\in\aut(U)$ with $f(0)=0$ and $|f(z)|<1$, thus by Schwarz lemma $|f(z)|\le|z|$. Apply the above reasoning to the inversion $z=f^{-1}(\omega)$ we get $|f(z)|=|z|$, thus again by Schwarz lemma we have $f(z)=e^{i\alpha}z,\alpha\in\mathbb R$.
  Now we've obtained the following three classes of automorphisms: $$\begin{align}\aut(\overline{\mathbb C})&=\Set{z\to\frac{az+b}{cz+d},ad-bc\neq0}\\\aut(\mathbb C)&=\set{z\to az+b,\ a\neq0}\\\aut(\mathbb D)&=\Set{z\to e^{i\alpha}\frac{z-a}{1-\overline az},\left|a\right|<1,\alpha\in\mathbb R}\end{align}$$It's easy to see that different canonical domains are not isomorphic to each other. Domain without boundary coincides with $\overline{\mathbb C}$, domain whose boundary is a point is conformally equivalent to $\mathbb C$, and domain with continuous boundary is conformally equivalent to $U$, as stated in Riemann theorem below.
	- **Uniqueness of conformal maps**: if $D\sim U$, then the set of conformal maps of $D$ onto $U$ depends on three real parameters. In particular, if the following conditions are given: $$f(z_0)=0,\quad\arg f'(z_0)=\theta$$then there is a unique conformal map that maps $D$ onto $U$. 
### Compactness principle
A family $\set{f}$ of functions defined in $D$ is **locally uniformly bounded** is for any domain $K\subsetneq D$ there exists a constant $M=M(K)$ such that $$|f(z)|\le M,\quad\forall z\in K,f\in\set{f}$$A family $\set{f}$ is **locally equicontinuous** if for any $\varepsilon>0,K\subsetneq D$ there exists $\delta=\delta(\varepsilon,K)$ such that $$|f(z_1)-f(z_2)|<\varepsilon,\quad\forall z_1,z_2\in K,|z_1,z_2|<\delta,f\in\set{f}$$
- **Boundedness implies equi-continuity**: A family of holomorphic functions $\set{f}$ that are locally uniformly bounded on $D$ is also locally equicontinuous.
  **Proof**: for any $K\subsetneq D$ denote $2\rho$ the distance between $K$ and $\partial D$ (when $D=\mathbb C/\overline{\mathbb C}$ the statement is obvious), and let $$K^{(\rho)}=\bigcup_{z_0\in K}\set{z:|z-z_0|<\rho}$$be the $\rho$-enlargement of $K$. Since $K^{(\rho)}\subsetneq D$ we have $|f(z_1)-f(z_2)|$ bounded by $2M$, and for the disk $U_\rho=\set{z:|z-z_1|<\rho}$ corollary of Schwarz lemma implies that $$|f(z)-f(z_1)|\le\frac{2M}{\rho}|z-z_1|,\quad\forall z\in U_\rho$$Now given $\varepsilon>0$ we choose $\delta=\min\left(\rho,\frac{\varepsilon\rho}{2M}\right)$ then we have $|f(z_1)-f(z_2)|<\varepsilon$ for all $f\in\set{f}$ and $|z_1-z_2|<\delta$.
- **Montel's theorem (compactness principle)**: if $\set{f}$ is locally uniformly bounded on $D$ then it's compact, i.e., for any sequence $\set{f_n}\subset\set{f}$ there is a subsequence $\set{f_{n_k}}$ that converges uniformly on any domain $K$ properly contained in $D$.
  **Proof**: we first proof that 1). every sequence has a subsequence that converges at every point of a dense subset, and then show that 2). such subsequence converges uniformly on every compact subset.
	1. Set $E=\set{z=x+yi\in D:x,y\in\mathbb Q}$ and index the elements as $E=\set{z_k}_{k=1}^\infty$. The sequence $f_{n,1}(z_1)$ is bounded, thus admitting a converging subsequence. Similarly we find a converging subsequence $f_{n,2}(z_2)$. Repeat this process as $k\in\mathbb N$, then the subsequence $\set{f_{k,k}}_{k=1}^\infty$ is what we want.
	2. Easily verified using $3\varepsilon$ method combined with the equicontinuity from last theorem.
- **Riemann theorem**: any simply connected domain $D$ with a boundary that contains more than one point is conformally equivalent to the unit disk $\mathbb D$. 