**Holomorphicity** of a [[Complex Function]] $f:D\to\mathbb{C},D\subset\mathbb C$ is defined as $$f\in\mathcal O(D)\qiffq f'(z_0)=\lim_{z\to z_0}\frac{f(z)-f(z_0)}{z-z_0}\text{ exists}$$In such case $f'(z_0)$ is called the **derivative** of $f$ at $z_0$. A function that is said to be **holomorphic at $z_0\in D$** if it's holomorphic on some open neighborhood of $z_0$. Equivalent characterizations of holomorphicity are listed in [[Complex Function]]. 
- **Order**: for entire $f$ we define its order of growth by $$\rho=\limsup_{r\to\infty}\frac{\ln(\ln\|f\|_{\infty,B_r})}{\ln r}$$where $B_r=\set{z:|z|\le r}$. i.e., $\rho$ is the infimum of all $m$ such that $|f(z)|=O(\exp(|z|^m)),z\to\infty$.
	- $\rho(fg)=\max\set{\rho_f,\rho_g}$.
	- If the Taylor expansion $f(z)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}a_nz^n$ is given then $$\rho=\limsup_{n\to\infty}\frac{n\ln n}{-\ln|a_n|}$$The converse also holds by some estimation.
	  **Proof**: notice that by Cauchy's inequality, when $|F(z)|\le A\exp(a|z|^\rho)$ we have $$\limsup_{n\to\infty}|a_n|^{1/n}n^{1/\rho}<\infty$$simplifying this expression to get the estimation.
- **Type**: for $0<\rho<\infty$ we can further define the type as $$\sigma=\limsup_{r\to\infty}\frac{\ln\|f\|_{\infty,B_r}}{r^\rho}$$
- **Little Picard's theorem**: any entire function omitting at least two values in $\mathbb C$ is constant.
  **Proof**: if $f$ misses $c_1,c_2$, then $f-c_1$ is non-vanishing, hence $f-c_1=\exp g$, and now since $\exp g+c_1$ misses $c_2$ we know that $g$ must be constant. [[Zero of Holomorphic Function]]
- **Biholomorphic function**: a function is biholomorphic if it's holomorphic with holomorphic inverse. A holomorphism is biholomorphic iff it's bijective. 
  **Proof**: for $(\Rightarrow)$, invertible function is trivially bijective ([[Set]]); for $(\Leftarrow)$, given $f$ bijective and holomorphic on domain $D$, we must have $f'(z)\neq0$ (otherwise it's necessarily injective via Laurent series representation), hence by the inverse function theorem ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]) $f$ admits a smooth inverse, which is holomorphic by verifying the Cauchy-Riemann equation ([[Complex Function]]). 
## Laurent series
Consider a holomorphic function on an annulus $$f\in\mathcal O(A)\where A=\set{z\in\mathbb C:r<|z-c|<R}$$where $0\le r<R$, then it can be uniquely represented by its **Laurent series** $$f(z)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z} a_n(z-c)^n\where a_n=\frac{f^{(n)}(c)}{n!}=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\gamma\frac{f(\xi)}{(\xi-c)^{n+1}}d\xi$$**Proof**: pick a smaller annulus with the same center $$V'=\set{z\in\mathbb C:r'<|z-c|<R'}\where r<r'<R'<R$$and denote $\partial V'=\Gamma'+\gamma'$ with counterclockwise orientation, then by Cauchy's integral formula ([[Cauchy Integral]]) we have $$f(z)=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{\xi-z}d\xi-\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{\xi-z}d\xi$$Now the first term expands with geometric series into the **regular part**: $$\begin{align}\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{\xi-z}d\xi&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(\xi-c)-(z-c)}d\xi\\&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(\xi-c)\left(1-\frac{z-c}{\xi-c}\right)}d\xi\\&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{\xi-c}\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\left(\frac{z-c}{\xi-c}\right)^nd\xi\\&=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}(z-c)^n\cdot\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\Gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(\xi-c)^{n+1}}d\xi\end{align}$$while the second term expands into the **principal part**: $$\begin{align}-\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{\xi-z}d\xi&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(z-c)-(\xi-c)}d\xi\\&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(z-c)\left(1-\frac{\xi-c}{z-c}\right)}d\xi\\&=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{z-c}\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\left(\frac{\xi-c}{z-c}\right)^nd\xi\\&=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}(z-c)^{-n-1}\cdot\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_{\gamma'}\frac{f(\xi)}{(\xi-c)^{-n}}d\xi\end{align}$$Here the exchange of integral and summation is justified by uniform convergence on compact subset ([[Complex Sequence]]). For uniqueness, notice that for arbitrary $k\in\mathbb N$ we have $$\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}a_n(z-c)^n=\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}b_n(z-c)^n\imply\int_\gamma\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}a_n(z-c)^{n-k-1}dz=\int_\gamma\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}b_n(z-c)^{n-k-1}dz$$Still by exchanging integration and summation we have $a_k=b_k$. 
- **Domain of convergence**: by [[Complex Sequence]] the radius of convergence is given by $$A=\set{r<|z|<R}\where1/R=\limsup_{n\to\infty}|a_n|^{1/n},\quad r=\limsup_{n\to\infty}|a_{-n}|^{1/n}$$Moreover, the convergence is **absolute on $A$** and **uniform on compact subset of $A$**. It could happen that $r>R$, in which case $A=\varnothing$. 
	- **Domain of convergence extends to the nearest singularity**: there exists at least one singularity of $f$ on both $\Gamma$ and $\gamma$. 
	  **Proof**: the above argument applies to any annulus over which $f$ is holomorphic, while the domain of convergence cannot contain a singularity as its interior by absolute convergence. These two facts, combined together, proves the result. 
	- **Cauchy inequality for Laurent series**: let holomorphic $f$ be bounded by $M$ on $\gamma_\rho$, then$$|a_n|\le\frac{M}{\rho^n},\quad n\in\mathbb Z$$its derivation is similar to the original Cauchy inequality. [[Cauchy Integral]]
- **Order of zero/pole**: for $f\in\mathcal O(N_c)$ whose Laurent series can be written as $$f(z)=\sum_{n=n_0}^\infty a_n(z-c)^n\where n_0\in\mathbb Z$$we define the **order of the zero/pole** as $$\ord(f,c)=n_0$$Related results are discussed in [[Zero of Holomorphic Function]] and [[Pole of Holomorphic Function]]. 
- **Relation with [[Fourier Series]]**: the Fourier series in complex form is $$\phi(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty}^\infty c_ne^{inx},\quad c_n=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi}\phi(t)e^{-int}dt$$If we set $e^{it}=z,\phi(t)=f(e^{it})=f(z)$, then the above expression is exactly the same as Laurent series. Conversely, the Laurent series of $f(z)$ on the unit circle (by fixing $r=1$ in $f(re^{i\theta})$) is the Fourier series of $f(z)=\phi(t)$ on $[0,2\pi]$. More specifically, their coefficients are connected via the [[Cauchy Integral]] by $c_n=a_nR^n$. 
## Singularity
We'll only discuss **isolated singularity**, i.e., a singularity $c\in\overline{\mathbb C}$ with a punctured neighborhood over which $f$ is holomorphic. There are three types of singularities, with two of them listed below, and the type of pole detailed in [[Pole of Holomorphic Function]]. 
### Removable singularity
A singularity $c$ is **removable** if the following limit of function value exists and is finite: $$\lim_{z\to c}f(z)=w\in\mathbb C$$This happens when $f$ is not define at $c$, e.g., the function $f(z)=\frac{\sin z}{z}$. 
- **Verification by Laurent series**: $c$ is removable iff the Laurent expansion of $f$ contains no principal part, justified by Cauchy's inequality. 
- **Riemann's analytic continuation theorem**: for $f\in\mathcal O(D\backslash\set{c})$ with $c\in D\subset\mathbb C$, the following statements are equivalent:
  1. $f$ is homomorphically/continuously extendable over $c$.
  2. There exists a neighborhood of $c$ on which $f$ is bounded.
  3. $\lim_{z\to c}(z-c)f(z)=0$ (this can be weakened to $|f|\le A|z-c|^{-1+\varepsilon},\varepsilon>0$).
  **Proof**: $1\Rightarrow2\Rightarrow3$ is obvious. To show $3\Rightarrow1$ we only need to apply Cauchy's inequality ([[Cauchy Integral]]), and use the fact that analyticity $\iff$ holomorphicity. 
	- **Discussion**: analytic continuation theorem reflects the richer structure information of $\mathbb C$ compared to $\mathbb R$ discussed in [[Complex Function]] - while functions of two sides of a discontinuity can not interfere each other for $f:\mathbb R\to\mathbb R$, the domain $\mathbb C$ is still path connected even after removing finitely many points, hence the constraints of holomorphicity still "propagates" to the other side. 
### Essential singularity
A singularity $c$ is **essential** if the limit of $f$ is neither a finite or infinite limit as $z\to a$, like $e^{1/z}$ at $z=0$, illustrated by the figures below. 
- **Verification by Laurent series**: $z=c$ is essential iff the Laurent expansion contains infinitely many non-zero terms. This is direct from the above two results.
	- If we perform $z\to1/z$ to the principal part, we'll get a holomorphic function on a  co-circle $C_r^C=\set{|z|>r}$. Then Weierstrass theorem below shows that such function attains range dense in $\mathbb C$. 
- **Casorati-Weierstrass theorem**: if $c$ is an essential singularity of $f$ and $U$ is a neighborhood of $c$, then $f(U\backslash\set{c})$ is dense in $\overline{\mathbb C}$.
  **Proof**: if there is some $A$ with $|f(z)-A|>\epsilon$, then $g(z)=1/(f(z)-b)$ is bounded on a neighborhood of $c$, hence by Riemann's analytic continuation theorem $c$ is a removable singularity, a contradiction. 
- **Great Picard's theorem**: on any punctured neighborhood of essential singularity $c$, $f(z)$ takes on all possible complex values infinitely often with at most one single exception.
## Classification of holomorphic function
Based on the above knowledge we may classify some common functions.
- **Entire function**: obviously we only need to discuss the behavior of $f$ at $\infty$:
	- **$\lim_{z\to\infty} f(z)$ exists**: by Liouville's theorem such $f$ must be constant. [[Cauchy Integral]]
	- **$\infty$ is a pole**: consider the Laurent expansion of $1/f$ we have $f$ being a polynomial.
	- **$\infty$ is an essential singularity**: we call such function as **transcendental entire function**. 
- **Meromorphic function**: a meromorphic function $f$ on $\mathbb C$ is a rational function.
  **Proof**: number of poles must be finite, otherwise there will be limit point of poles since $\overline{\mathbb C}$ is compact. Denote them as $c_k,1\le k\le n$ and let $g_k(z)=\sum_{i=1}^{N_k}a_i^{(k)}(z-c_k)^{-i}$ be the principal part of $f$ near the pole $c_k$. Also denote $g(z)=\sum_{i=1}^Na_iz^i$ the principal part of $f$ at $\infty$, then $$\phi(z)=f(z)-g(z)-\sum_{k=1}^ng_k(z)$$has no singularities in $\overline{\mathbb C}$, thus $\phi(z)=c_0$. Therefore $f(z)=\phi(z)+g(z)+\sum_{k=1}^ng_k(z)$ is rational.
	- **Corollary**: any rational function is determined up to a multiplicative constant by prescribing the locations and multiplicities of its zeros and poles.
	- **Number of poles/zeros**: notice that in a rational function finite zeros/poles correspond to a poles/zeros at $\infty$, hence their overall counts (multiplicity included) equals.
	- **Transcendental meromorphic function**: a meromorphic on $\mathbb C$ that is not rational is called a transcendental meromorphic function. 
## Real & imaginary part
For holomorphic $f=u+iv$ on simply connected domain $D$, both $u(x,y),v(x,y)$ are [[Harmonic function]]. Note that the converse also holds ([[Harmonic function]]).
- **Borel-Carathéodory theorem**: for $f$ analytic on $\overline{D_R}$, for $r<R$ we have $$\max_{|z|=r}|f(z)|\le\frac{2r}{R-r}\max_{|z|\le R}\Re f(z)+\frac{R+r}{R-r}|f(0)|$$**Proof**: denote $A=\sup_{|z|\le R}\Re f(z)$. For $f$ non-constant first assume that $f(0)=0$, then obviously $A>0$. Since $\im f\subset\set{z:\Re z\le A}$, consider two mappings $$g:z\mapsto\frac{z}{A}-1,\quad h:z\mapsto\frac{R(z+1)}{z-1}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad h\circ g:z\mapsto\frac{Rz}{z-2A}$$then $h\circ g\circ f$ sends $0$ to $0$ and sends the half plane $\set{z:\Re z\le A}$ to $D_R$. By Schwarz's lemma we have $|Rf(z)|/|f(z)-2A|\le |z|=r$, simplified (with triangle inequality) to the desired inequality. For $f(0)\neq0$ we use translation to get the general result.
	- **Intuition**: the proof is actually generalizing the application of Schwarz's lemma from a circle to a half plane, utilizing Möbius transform to serve as a bridge between two shapes ([[Geometry of Holomorphic Function]]). More related on this technique can be found in [[Domain-Image Regularization]].
	- **Alternative proof**: by the following theorem we can bound $f^{(n)}(0)$, and Taylor expansion would yield the result. 
	- **Shortcoming**: an obvious problem it that RHS explodes as $r\to R$, making it almost useless near the boundary. This is way weaker than Schwarz's lemma itself because, intuitively it only restricts the range into half plane, causing an under-kill in the Möbius transform. 
		- **Example**: take $z/(1+\varepsilon-z)$, which contains a complex inversion w.r.t $|z-1-\varepsilon|=1$, then obviously as $\varepsilon\searrow0$ the unit disk will be mapped to almost entire $\Re z<0$. 
		- **Partial remedy**: if $f$ is entire we can increase $R$ to arbitrarily large, which allows for some useful discussion of bounds of $|f(z)|$.
- **Cauchy's inequality for real/imaginary part**: for $f$ holomorphic on $D_{R+\varepsilon}$ for some $\varepsilon>0$ and $u\le M$ on $\partial D$, we have $$|f^{(n)}(0)|\le\frac{2n!}{R^n}(M-u(0)),\quad\forall n\ge1$$and similar for $v$. 
  **Proof**: WLOG assume $f(0)=0$, then by Cauchy integral formula $\frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_0^{2\pi}\frac{f(Re^{i\theta})}{R^ne^{in\theta}}d\theta$. Also notice that $$\begin{align}&\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})e^{in\theta}d\theta=\frac{1}{iR^n}\int_{C_R} f(z)z^{n-1}dz=0\\&\int_0^{2\pi}f(Re^{i\theta})d\theta=\frac{1}{i}\int_{C_R}f(z)z^{-1}dz=0\end{align}$$Pick a proper rotation $e^{-i\theta_0}f^{(n)}(0)=|f^{(n)}(0)|$, then combining the above three integrals yields $$\int_0^{2\pi} f(Re^{i\theta})(1+\cos(n\theta+\theta_0))d\theta=\frac{2\pi R^n|f^{(n)}(0)|}{2n!}$$Now the imaginary part vanishes, while $\int_0^{2\pi}(1+\cos(n\theta+\theta_0))=2\pi$, hence the result follows.
	- **Alternative proof**: instead of manually taking a rotation we could also deduce an identity for the real part only, and then perform the estimation. Notice that by Cauchy's inequality ([[Cauchy Integral]]) applied on $f(z)z^{n-1}$ we have $\int f(Re^{i\theta})e^{in\theta}d\theta=0$, and if we take a conjugate and add it into Cauchy integral formula we have $$\frac{1}{\pi R^n}\int_0^{2\pi}u(Re^{i\theta})e^{-in\theta}d\theta=\frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}$$Now that $\int e^{-in\theta}=0$, we add in $M$ to dominate the real part term: $$\frac{1}{\pi R^n}\int_0^{2\pi}(M-u(Re^{i\theta}))e^{-in\theta}d\theta=-\frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}$$Now triangle inequality can be applied, and by dropping $e^{-in\theta}$ term and use the mean value property of [[Harmonic function]] we get the same inequality.