Given $V$ a [[Vector Space]] over some ordered [[Field]], a subset $C\subset V$ is **convex** if $$(1-t)x+ty\in C,\quad\forall x,y\in C,t\in[0,1]$$We say that $C$ is **strictly convex** if the above expression is in the topological interior ([[Topological Space]]) of $C$.
- **Convex hull**: the convex hull of $A\subset V$ is defined as the smallest convex set containing $A$: $$\conv A=\bigcap_{A\subset C\subset V,C\text{ convex}}C$$Equivalently, it's the set of all convex combinations of points in $A$.  
- **Supporting hyperplane**: a supporting hyperplane of a convex $C$ is a [[Hyperplane]] $H$ s.t. $C$ is entirely contained in one of the two closed half-spaces bounded by $H$, and $S$ has at least one boundary-point on $H$. 
	- **Discussion**: while supporting hyperplane could exists for general subset of a vector space, we're mostly interested in those of convex sets due to practical purposes and their good properties. 
## Convex function
Given $X$ a convex subset of real vector space, and $f:X\to\mathbb R$ a function. $f$ is called **convex** iff $$f(tx_1+(1-t)x_2)\le tf(x_1)+(1-t)f(x_2),\quad\forall x_1,x_2\in X,t\in[0,1]$$We can define **strict convexity** similarly. $f$ is **concave** if $-f$ is convex. 
- **Arithmetic property**
	- **Operations that preserves convexity**: given $f_i$ convex and $w_i\ge0$ the **weighted sum** $$f=\sum_{i=1}^nw_if_i$$is convex, and their element-wise maximum $$f_\max=\max_{1\le i\le n}f_i$$is also convex. Moreover, their composition is also convex.
- **Convexity criterion**: some useful criteria for convexity is listed below. We'll denote $S$ the domain of definition.
	- **$C^1$ function**: $f\in C^1(S)$ is convex iff $$\nabla f(x)\cdot(y-x)\le f(y)-f(x)$$whose proof is direct based on the definition.
	- **$C^2$ function**: $f\in C^2(S)$ is convex iff we have the definite condition ([[Quadratic Form]]) $$H_f\succeq0$$where $H_f$ is the Hessian matrix ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]). The proof follows from the Taylor's theorem.
- **Jensen's inequality**: given $w\ge0,\|w\|_1=1$ and $\varphi$ convex on $[a,b]\subset\mathbb R$, if $f$ is measurable with $\im f\subset [a,b],fw\in L^1(X)$ ([[Lp Space]]), then we have $$\varphi\left(\int_Xfw\right)\le\int_X(\varphi\circ f)\cdot w$$**Proof**: by convexity at $x_0=\int_Efw$ we may pick $\alpha,\beta\in\mathbb R$ s.t. $$\varphi(x)\ge \alpha x+\beta,\quad\forall x\in[a,b]\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\varphi\circ f\ge\alpha f+\beta$$Multiply $w$ and integrate both sides over $E$, we get $$\int_E(\varphi\circ f)\cdot w\ge\alpha\int_Efw+\beta=\alpha x_0+\beta=\varphi(x_0)=\varphi\left(\int_Efw\right)$$which completes the proof.
	- **Intuition**: we're essentially relying on the geometric interpretation that any convex combination of points within a convex set still lies within the set. Further if $\varphi$ is homogeneous we can actually weaken our condition to $\|w\|<\infty$.
	- **Probability measure form**: sometimes we use a probability space setting ([[Random Variable]]) $(\Omega,\Sigma,\mu)$ instead of a weight function, and the form is $$\varphi\left(\int_\Omega fd\mu\right)\le\int\varphi\circ fd\mu$$this is equivalent to the above form via the R-N derivative ([[Signed Measure]]) $d\mu=wd\lambda$.
## Logarithmic convexity
A function $f$ is **logarithmically convex (log-convex)** if $\ln f$ is convex. Equivalently, the definition for convexity gives rise to the corresponding definition for log convexity: $$\ln f((1-t)x+ty)\le(1-t)\ln f(x)+t\ln f(y)\quad\iff\quad f((1-t)x+ty)\le f(x)^{1-t}f(y)^t$$and similarly we can also derive the tangent line characterization $$\ln f(x)\ge \ln f(y)+\frac{f'(y)}{f(y)}(x-y)\quad\iff\quad\left(\frac{f(x)}{f(y)}\right)^{\frac{1}{x-y}}\ge\exp\left(\frac{f'(y)}{f(y)}\right)$$Given that $f\in C^2$, we have a further equivalent characterization $f''(x)f(x)\ge f'(x)^2$.
- **Arithmetic property**
	- **Operations that preserve log convexity**: given $f_i$ log convex and $w_i>0$, we have $$f=\prod_{i=1}^nf_i^{w_i}$$being log convex, and similar to above we also have their element-wise supremum being log convex.
- **Relation with convexity**: by convexity of exponential function we have that $$f(x)^{1-t}f(y)^t<(1-t)f(x)+tf(y),\quad\forall t\in(0,1)$$hence log-convex function is strictly convex, while a convex function is not necessarily convex. 