In this note we discuss some basic definitions, properties, and related results of real number.
Axiomatically, the set of **real numbers** $\mathbb R$ can be defined via four axioms:
1. **[[Field]] structure**: $(\mathbb R,+,\times)$ is a Field.
2. **[[Order]] structure**: $(\mathbb R,\le)$ is totally ordered.
3. **Compatibility between arithmetic and order**: $+,\times$ are compatible with the order. That is:
	1. For $x,y,z\in\mathbb R$, we have $x\le y\Rightarrow x+z\le y+z$.
	2. For $x,y\in\mathbb R$, we have $0\le x,0\le y\Rightarrow0\le xy$.
4. **Dedekind Completeness**: $\le$ is Dedekind-complete in the sense that every nonempty subset of $\mathbb R$ that is bounded above has a least upper bound. This is also called the **least upper bound** (LUP) property.
The four axioms above completely characterize the real number system, i.e., any two sets satisfying four axioms are isomorphic. 
Some basic properties derived directly from the axioms, or related information, are listed below:
- **Archimedean property**: for any $x,y\in\mathbb R,x>0$ there exists $n\in\mathbb N$ s.t. $nx-y\ge0$. This follows from Dedekind completeness.
- **Dedekind cut construction**: $\mathbb R$ can also be constructed explicitly from $\mathbb Q$ via Dedekind cut, which is essentially similar to other characterization via Cauchy sequence ([[Metric Space]]). This process is quite straightforward and tedious, hence we skip it here.
## Completeness of real numbers
All of the following theorems are **equivalent**, and describe the **completeness** of real numbers.
- **Dedekind cut**: every Dedekind cut of $\mathbb R$ is generated by a real number.
	- **Definition of Dedekind cut**: a Dedekind cut is a nontrivial partition $\mathbb Q=A\sqcup B$ s.t. $A$ is closed downwards (if $x,y\in\mathbb Q,x<y,y\in A$, then $x\in A$) and does not contain a greatest element.
- **Least upper bound property**: $\le$ is Dedekind complete. This is exactly the axiom 4.
- **Cauchy completeness**: see definition in [[Metric Space]].
- **Nested interval theorem**: consider a sequence of nested interval $$I_n=[a_n,b_n]\quad\text{s.t.}\quad I_1\supset I_2\supset\cdots$$if we have $\lim_{n\to\infty}b_n-a_n=0$, then $\bigcap_{n\in\mathbb N}I_n=\set r$.
- **Monotone convergence theorem**: every non-decreasing, bounded sequence of real numbers converges.
- **Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem**: every bounded sequence of real numbers has a convergent subsequence. 