Discussion in this note assumes metric space. For more general content see [[Topological Space]]. Some related topics can be found in [[Cardinality]].
- $B_E(a,\delta):=\{x\in E|d(a,x)<\delta\}$ is a *ball*, $S_E(a,\delta):= \{x\in E|d(a,x)=\delta\}$ is a *sphere*.
- **Open set**: $G$ is open if any point of $G$ is an interior point of $G$.
- **Closed set**: $F$ is closed can be defined as:
	- Any limit point of F is a point of $F$.
	- $E = \overline{E}$.
  The **closure** of E is defined as $\overline{E}=E\cup E'=\operatorname{int}(E)\cup \partial E$.
- **Power set**: given $X$ define its power set as the family of its subset: $$2^X=\set{A\subset X}$$This is sometimes denoted as $\mathcal P(X)$.
	- **Closedness under set operations**: for $\mathcal A\subset 2^X$ we define the following concepts:
	  - **$\cap$-closedness**: $A,B\in\mathcal A\Longrightarrow A\cap B\in\mathcal A$.
	  - **$\cup$-closedness**: $A,B\in\mathcal A\Longrightarrow A\cup B\in\mathcal A$.
	  - **$\backslash$-closedness**: $A,B\in\mathcal A\Longrightarrow A\backslash B\in\mathcal A$.
	  - **Closedness under complement**: $A\in\mathcal A\Longrightarrow A^C\in\mathcal A$.
	  For $\sigma$-closedness we just modify the above operations to countable ones.
- **De Morgan's law**: given a family of subsets $\set{A_\alpha}_{\alpha\in I}$ of total set $S$ we have $$\left(\bigcup_{\alpha\in I} A_\alpha\right)^C=\bigcap_{\alpha\in I}A_\alpha^C,\quad\left(\bigcap_{\alpha\in I} A_\alpha\right)^C=\bigcup_{\alpha\in I}A_\alpha^C$$this can be shown via two-sided inclusion.
- **Inclusion-exclusion principle**: given sets $A_i\subset S,1\le i\le n$ we have $$\left|\bigcup_{i=1}^nA_i\right|=\sum_{\varnothing\neq J\subset[n]}(-1)^{|J|+1}\left|\bigcap_{j\in J}A_j\right|$$which can be shown via a simple induction. Its useful complementary form $$\left|\bigcap_{i=1}^nA_i^C\right|=\left|S-\bigcup_{i=1}^nA_i\right|=|S|-\sum_{\varnothing\neq J\subset[n]}(-1)^{|J|+1}\left|\bigcap_{j\in J}A_j\right|$$which uses the De Morgan's law.
- **limit**: formally we define $$\limsup E_n=\bigcap_{j=1}^\infty\bigcup_{k=j}^\infty E_n,\quad\liminf E_n=\bigcup_{j=1}^\infty\bigcap_{k=j}^\infty E_n$$Intuitively, $\limsup E_n$ contains elements that appears in infinitely many $E_n$, while $\liminf E_n$ contains elements that is only absent in finitely many $E_n$.
- **Disjoint union**: in set theory disjoint union of sets is usually denoted as $$A\uplus B\quad\text{or}\quad A\sqcup B$$in [[Category]] theory given $\set{A_i}_{i\in I}\subset\mathcal P(S)$  we define their co-product as $$\coprod_{i\in I} A_i=\bigcup_{i\in I}(\set{i}\times A_i)$$that is, while $A_i$ may overlap, we ensure that they do not in the disjoint union by adjoining indexed copies. 
- **Summation**: given an index set $I$ and a set of values $\set{v(i)}\subset\mathbb R$ we define $$\sum_{i\in I}v(i)=\sup_{E\subset I,|E|<\infty}\sum_{i\in E}v(i)$$when the RHS limit exists. Note that to make the above notation meaningful the index set must be at most countable, since given any $\varepsilon>0$ we need $\#\set{i\in I:|a_i|>\varepsilon}<\infty$ to ensure convergence of summation.
	- **Increasing function has at most countably many discontinuities**: for $f$ increasing denote $S(x)=f(x^+)-f(x^-)$, then $f$ is continuous at $x$ iff $S(x)=0$. By monotonicity $$\sum_{x\in[a,b]}S(x)\le f(b)-f(a),\quad\forall a<b$$hence $S(x)>0$ for at most countably many $x\in [a,b]$, proving the result. Conversely given any $E\subset\mathbb R$ at most countable we can easily construct increasing $f$ that is discontinuous right at the points in $E$.
## System of sets
Below we assume that $\Omega$ is a nonempty set.
- **$\lambda$-system (Dynkin system)**: a collection of subsets $D\subset\mathcal P(\Omega)$ is a $\lambda$-system if:
  1. $\Omega\in D$.
  2. **Closed under complements of subsets in supersets**: $A,B\in D,A,\subset B$ implies $B\backslash A\in D$.
  3. **Closed under countable increasing union**: $A_n\in D,A_1\subset A_2\subset\cdots$ implies $\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty A_n\in D$.
  It's easy to verify that $\varnothing\in D$, and $D$ is closed under complements in $\Omega$ and countable unions of disjoint sets.
- **$\pi$-system**: a collection of subsets $P\subset\mathcal P(\Omega)$ is a $\pi$-system if:
  1. $P\neq\varnothing$.
  2. **closed under intersection**: if $A,B\in P$, then $A\cap B\in P$.
**Sierpiński–Dynkin's $\pi$-$\lambda$ theorem**: if $P$ is a $\pi$-system and $D$ is a $\lambda$-system with $P\subset D$, then $\sigma(P)\subset D$ where $\sigma(\cdot)$ implies the $\sigma$-algebra generated by a family of sets.
## $\sigma$-Algebra
Note that an algebra is sometimes referred to as a field, in particular in probability theory. That's why some textbook in this field use $(\Omega,\mathcal F)$ rather than $(\Omega,\Sigma)$ and call the space of events a event field.
- **Algebra**: an algebra of set on $X$ is a nonempty collection of subsets of $X$ that is closed under finite unions and complements.
	- **Complement and union produces intersection**: notice that $(A^C\cup B^C)^C=A\cap B$. 
- **$\sigma$-algebra:** an algebra that is closed under complement and countable unions/intersections.
	- **Cardinality**: for infinite $\Sigma$ we have $|\Sigma|\ge \mathfrak c$ ([[Cardinality]]). This can be proven with the fact that $\mathcal{M}$ contains an **infinite sequence of disjoint sets**.
	- **Equivalent condition**: a collection $\Sigma\subset\mathcal P(X)$ that is closed under complement and countable union of disjoint sets is a $\sigma$-algebra, since any countable union can be written as disjoint countable union by taking successive complement.
- **Product algebra**: for $\{X_\alpha\}_{\alpha\in A}$, let $X=\prod X_\alpha$ and $\Sigma_\alpha$ a $\sigma$-algebra on $X_\alpha$, then the product $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by$$\bigotimes_{\alpha\in A}\Sigma_\alpha=\{\pi_\alpha^{-1}(E_\alpha):E_\alpha\in\Sigma_\alpha,\alpha\in A\}$$where $\pi_\alpha:X\to X_\alpha$ is the coordinate maps. Note that the algebra directly induced by this is $$\mathcal A=\set{E=\prod E_\alpha:E_\alpha=X_\alpha\text{ for all but finitely many }\alpha}$$
## $\sigma$-Ring
Given a set $\Omega$ we denote $2^\Omega$ its power set, and define the following concepts:
- **Ring**: a class $\mathcal A\subset 2^\Omega$ is called a ring if it's closed under finite union and difference.
	- **$\cap$-closedness**: notice that $A\backslash(A\backslash B)=A\cap B$, hence $\backslash$-closedness immediately produces $\cap$-closedness.
- **$\sigma$-Ring**: a ring is further a $\sigma$-ring if it's $\sigma$-$\cup$-closed.
	- **$\sigma$-$\cap$-closedness**: $\sigma$-ring is also $\sigma$-$\cap$-closed, since by De Morgan's law we have $$\bigcap_{n\in\mathbb N}A_n=\bigcap_{n=1}^\infty(A_0\cap A_n)=\bigcap_{n=1}^\infty A_0\backslash(A_0\backslash A_n)=A_1\left\backslash\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty(A_1\backslash A_n)\right.\in\mathcal A$$We can further induce that any countable union of sets can be expressed as countable disjoint union of sets in $\mathcal A$.
## Borel set
**Borel set** is any set within the Borel algebra ([[Measure]]), i.e., can be formed from open sets through countable union, countable intersection, and complement.
- **$F_\sigma,G_\delta$ sets**: an $F_\sigma$ set is a countable union of closed sets, and $G_\delta$ set is a countable intersection of open sets.
	- If $E$ is a $F_\sigma$ set, then $E^C$ is a $G_\delta$ set, and vise versa.
	- **Countable dense set  of $\mathbb R$ cannot be $G_\delta$**: assume that $D\subset\mathbb R$ is a countable dense set with $D=\bigcap W_n$, each $W_n$ open, then $W_n$ must be dense. Consider $V_d=\mathbb R\backslash\set{d},d\in D$, then $V_d$ is also dense and open. Notice that $$\left(\bigcap_{n\in\mathbb N}W_n\right)\cap\left(\bigcap_{d\in D}V_d\right)=D\cap D^C=\varnothing$$On the other hand, since $\mathbb R$ is a Baire space, by Baire category theorem ([[Banach Space]]) the intersection would also be dense, which is a contradiction. 
		- **Corollary**: since $\mathbb Q$ is countable and sense in $\mathbb R$, there exists no function whose set of continuities is exactly $\mathbb Q$.
	- **Origin of name**: $F$ comes from *fermé*, meaning "closed" in French, and $G$ comes from *Gebiet*, meaning "open set" in German. $\sigma$ refers to summation/union, while $\delta$ refers to intersection.
## Axioms
- **Axiom of choice**: for any collection $X$ of non-empty sets, there exists a choice function $f$ that maps any set $A\in X$ to a element of the set $f(A)\in A$. Formally, we write$$\forall X\left[\varnothing\notin X\Rightarrow\exists f:X\to\bigcup_{A\in X}A\quad\forall A\in X(f(A)\in A)\right]$$
- **Well-ordering principle**: every non-empty subset of nonnegative integers contains a least element, i.e., $\mathbb N$ is well-ordered by its natural order.
	- **Zorn's lemma**: see [[Order]].
- **Hausdorff maximal principle**: every non-empty partially ordered set has a non-empty maximal linearly ordered subset.
## Matroid
The **matroid** is an abstract structure of set that generalizes the notion of linearly independence ([[Vector Space]]). In terms of independent set, a (finite) matroid $M$ is a pair $(E,\mathcal I)$ where $E$ is the **ground set**, and $\mathcal I\subset\mathcal P(E)$ is the collection of **independent sets**, satisfying:
1. **Independent empty set**: $\varnothing\in\mathcal I$.
2. **Downward-closed property**: if $A'\subset A\subset E,A\in\mathcal I$. then $A'\in\mathcal I$.
3. **Augmentation property**: if $A,B\in\mathcal I,|A|>|B|$, then there exists $x\in A\backslash B$ s.t. $(B\cup\set{x})\in\mathcal I$.
Any $B\in\mathcal P(E)\backslash\mathcal I$ is referred to as being **dependent**.
- **Basis**: any maximal independent set is referred to as a basis of $M$.
	- **Rank**: any two basis have the same number of elements by the augmentation property, which is referred to as the rank of $M$, denoted $\rank M$.