**Motivation**: given an arbitrary $f:\mathbb R\to\mathbb R$ it makes sense to decompose it into linear combination of basis to describe it more easily. The most natural choice is obviously the polynomials $x^n$. Note however there is nothing essentially special about $x^n$ except for their simplicity - we can also pick basis like $\frac{x^{n+1}}{(n+1)!}-\frac{x^n}{n!}, x^{n/2}$, etc., since all of them spans the entire space ([[Basis in Hilbert Space]]), but they would create an unnecessary struggle. Moreover we should note that Taylor series is a **local decomposition** rather than a global one, and its density (by Weierstrass theorem [[Functional Approximation]]) only ensures a sequence of polynomials rather than an approximation by adding new independent components.

---
**Taylor's theorem**: for $f\in C^k$ there exists $h_k(x)$ s.t. $$f(x)=\sum_{i=0}^k\frac{f^{(i)}(a)}{i!}(x-a)^i+h_k(x)(x-a)^k\where h_k(x)=o(1),x\to a$$By mean-value theorem ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]) we can also deduce the Lagrange form of the remainder term: $$R_k(x)=\frac{f^{(k+1)}(\xi_L)}{(k+1)!}(x-a)^{k+1},\quad\xi_L\in[a,x]$$The proof relies on L'Hôpital's rule.
- **Proof of remainder term**: by Cauchy's mean value theorem we have $$\begin{align}\frac{(f(x)-\sum c_i(x-a)^i)-0}{(x-a)^{n+1}}&=\frac{f^{(1)}(\xi_1)-\sum ic_i(\xi_1-a)^{i-1}}{(n+1)(\xi_1-a)^n}\\&=\frac{f^{(2)}(\xi_2)-\sum i(i-1)c_i(\xi_2-a)^{i-2}}{(n+1)n(\xi_2-a)^{n-1}}\\&=\cdots\\&=\frac{f^{n+1}(\xi_{n+1})}{(n+1)!}\end{align}$$denote $\xi_{n+1}=\xi_L$, then we get the result. Note the above reasoning actually shows a stronger result: given any $g\in C^{(n+1)}$ s.t. $g^{(n+1)}(x)\equiv0$ the remainder $f(x)-g(x)$ must have the mean value form.
- **Convergence**: as long as $f^{(k)}(\xi)\le M_{k,r},\forall x\in[a,a+r]$ the error can be controlled by $$|R_k(x)|\le M_{k,r}\frac{|x-a|^{k+1}}{(k+1)!}$$Hence proper constraints on growth speed of $M_{k,r},k\in\mathbb N$, or more specifically, $$\left|\frac{d^k}{dx^k}f(x)\right|\le C^{k+1}k!,\quad\forall x\in\text{compact }K\subset D$$for some constant $C=C(K)$ is equivalent to **analyticity**.
	- **Real analyticity**: $f$ is said to be (real) analytic at $x_0$ if there exists a neighborhood $U$ of $x_0$ s.t. the Taylor series converges to $f$. The convergence is actually **uniform** by the property of power series. [[Function on Euclidean Space]]
	- **Counterexample**: inefficiency of infinite differentiability can be illustrated by $$f(x)=\begin{cases}e^{-1/x^2}& x\neq0\\0&x=0\end{cases}\quad\text{or}\quad f(x)=\begin{cases}e^{-1/x^2}& x>0\\0&x\le0\end{cases}$$This example becomes obvious if we notice that $z=0$ is an essential singularity of $e^{-1/z^2}$. Thus convergence issue of Taylor series for real-valued functions amounts to complex analyticity of its complex continuation. [[Complex Function]]
	- **Useful formulas**: by analyzing the remainder of Lagrange form we have $$\begin{array}{ll}e^x=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\frac{x^n}{n!},x\in\mathbb R&\ln (1+x)=\sum_{n=1}^\infty\frac{(-1)^{n-1}}{n}x^n,x\in(-1,1]\\\sin x=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\frac{(-1)^n}{(2n+1)!}x^{2n+1},x\in\mathbb R&\cos x=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\frac{(-1)^n}{(2n)!}x^{2n},x\in\mathbb R\\(1+x)^\alpha=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\binom{\alpha}{n}x^n,\alpha\in\mathbb R\backslash\mathbb Z_+,x\in(-1,1)\end{array}$$See [[Zero of Holomorphic Function]] for other forms of identity.
- **Algebraic operation**: given $f,g$ analytic on $E$, it can be shown that $f+g,fg,f\circ g,f/g$ (if exists) are all analytic, with radius of convergence at each point no smaller than each.
- **Other forms of remainder term**: Using Cauchy's theorem the remainder term is $$R_k(x)=\frac{f^{(k+1)}(\xi_C)}{k!}(x-\xi_C)^k(x-a),\quad\xi_C\in[a,x]$$if $f$ is absolutely continuous on closed interval $[a,x]$, then we have the integral form $$R_k(x)=\frac{1}{k!}\int_a^x(x-t)^kf^{(k+1)}(t)dt$$This can be deduced via integration by parts ([[Integral Calculus on Euclidean Space]]). For $f\in C^\infty$ a sometimes useful remainder is $$R_k(x)=x^kg_k(x)\quad\text{where}\quad g_k(a)=\frac{f^{(k)}(0)}{k!},\quad g_k\in C^\infty$$which can be shown by direct differentiation and integration.
- **Comparison with [[Fourier Series]]**: the following differences are worth noting:
	- **Local vs global**: computation of Taylor series requires the information of the function at one point (differentiation information), while computation of Fourier series requires the information over an interval (integration information).
	- **Convergence**: for Taylor series analyticity is enough to ensure pointwise convergence at every point and uniform convergence over a compact interval; for Fourier series square integrability only ensures convergence in $L^2$, and additional requirements are needed for pointwise convergence.
	- **Approximation error**: Taylor series has small error within a small neighborhood but a large one once the interval gets big; error or Fourier series is distributed across the interval. 
## Higher-dimensional case
**Taylor's theorem (higher dimensional)**: using notations in [[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]], given $f\in C^m(\Omega)$ and $a\in\Omega$ we have $$f(a+h)=f(a)+\sum_{|\alpha|\le m}\frac{1}{\alpha!}\partial^\alpha f(a)h^\alpha+o(|h|^m)\where h^\alpha=\prod h_i^{\alpha_i}$$This is obviously unique. 