Given a [[Ring]] $(R,+,\cdot)$ an **ideal** is a subset $I\subset R$ s.t.:
1. **Additive subgroup structure**: $(I,+)\le(R,+)$.
2. **Multiplication absorption**: $RI\subset I,IR\subset I$. When only one hold, we call it left/right ideal. 
We sometimes use $\mathfrak{a,b,c}$, etc. to denote ideals. Note that an ideal is not necessarily a subring ([[Ring]]) since we have $1\notin I$ in non-trivial cases. 
- **Structure of collection of ideals**: we denote the collection of all ideals in the ring $R$ as $\Id R$. It's quite obvious from definition that $$I,J\in\Id R \imply I+J,IJ,I\cap J\in\Id R$$For convenience we also define $$\mathcal I_I(R)=\set{J\in\Id R:I\subset J}$$which is quite commonly used when dealing with quotient rings. 
- **Quotient ring**: for two-sided ideal $I$ in $R$ define the **quotient ring of $R$ modulo $I$** by $$R/I=R/\sim\quad\text{where}\quad r\sim s\iff r-s\in I,\quad\forall r,s\in R$$with operations given by $$(r+I)+(s+I)=(r+s)+I,\quad (r+I)\cdot(s+I)=(r\cdot s)+I$$This generalizes the notion of quotient [[Group]]. By absorption property $R/I$ is subring of $R$.
	- **Correspondence theorem for ideals**: we have the [[Lattice]] isomorphism between ideals $$\Phi_I:(\mathcal I_I(R),\subset)\to(\mathcal I(R/I),\subset),\quad\Phi(J)=J/I$$which follows directly form the correspondence theorem of [[Ring]]. 
## Special kind of ideals
- **Ideal generated by $S$**: given $S\subset R$ the ideal generated by $S$ is defined as $$(S)=\Set{\sum_{i=1}^{<\infty}r_is_it_i:r_i,t_i\in R,s_i\in S}=RSR$$We call $S$ a **system of generators** of $(S)$. Any $\mathfrak a=(a),a\in R$ is called **principal ideal**.
- **Prime ideal**: an ideal $\mathfrak p\subsetneq R$ is prime if $\mathfrak{ab\subset p}$ implies $\mathfrak{a\subset p}$ or $\mathfrak{b\subset p}$ for any two ideals $\mathfrak{a,b}$.
	- **Prime ideal in commutative ring**: for $R$ commutative this is equivalent to the condition that $ab\in\mathfrak p$ implies $a\in\mathfrak p$ or $b\in\mathfrak p$ for any $a,b\in R$. It suffices to apply the result on $(a),(b)$.
	- **Prime ideal in commutative ring**: for $R$ commutative it's obvious that $\mathfrak p$ is prime iff $R/\mathfrak p$ is an [[Integral Domain]].
- **Maximal ideal**: an ideal $\mathfrak m$ is maximal if $\mathfrak m\subsetneq I\subset R$ implies $I=R$.
	- **Quotient ring of maximal ideal**: for $R$ commutative $\frak m$ is maximal iff $R/\frak m$ is a [[Field]]. This follows directly from the correspondence theorem above, since a commutative ring is a field iff it has no nontrivial ideal. 
	- **Krull's theorem**: in a non-zero ring $R$ (with an identity), any proper ideal is contained in some maximal ideal.
	  **Proof**: let $I$ be an ideal and let $S$ be the set of ideals containing $I$. Now $(S,\subset)$ is a poset. For any chain $C$ within the poset we let $J=\bigcup_{A\in C}A$, then it can be verified that $J$ is also an ideal. As any proper ideal does not contain $1$, any chain has a upper bound, thus by Zorn's lemma $S$ has a maximal element, which is a maximal (proper) ideal containing $I$. [[Order]]
## Principal ideal domain
An [[Ring]] $R$ is a **principal idea ring (PIR)** if all its ideals are principal ideals. If it's further an [[Integral Domain]], then it's called a **principal ideal domain (PID)**.
- **Inclusion via division**: for $\mathfrak a=(a),\mathfrak b=(b)$ in integral domain $R$, we have $$\mathfrak b\subset\mathfrak a\quad\iff a\mid b$$hence naturally, $\mathfrak a=\mathfrak b\iff a\mid b,b\mid a$.
- **Bézout's identity**: given a PID (hence a GCD domain, by [[Integral Domain]]), for $a_i\in R,1\le i\le n$ we have $$\gcd(a_1,\cdots,a_n)=d\quad\iff\quad\sum_{i=1}^n(a_i)=(d)$$**Proof**: for $\Leftarrow$, it's obvious by definition of [[Ideal]] that $d\mid a_i$, and for any $d'$ with the division condition $d'\mid a_i,1\le i\le n$, write $a_i=k_i'd'$, then we have $$d=\sum_{i=1}^nr_ia_i=\sum_{i=1}^nr_ik_i'd'=\left(\sum_{i=1}^nr_ik_i'\right)d'\quad\Longrightarrow\quad d'\mid d$$hence by definition ([[Ring]]) we have $d=\gcd(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$. Conversely, for $\Rightarrow$, since $R$ is a PID we already know RHS is well-defined, and it suffices to show that $(d)$ is unique among all GCDs, which follows naturally from the equivalence condition above. 
	- **Bézout domain**: an integral domain in which sum of two principal ideals is still a principal ideal is called a Bézout domain. This is the weakest algebraic structure required for the Bézout's identity to hold for any pair of elements.
## Coprime ideal
Two ideals $H,N$ are said to be **coprime** if $H+N=R$. The name is in the sense that there exists $h\in H,n\in N$ such that $h+n=1$, as a form of Bézout's identity. 
- **Chinese remainder theorem (CRT)**: for pairwise coprime two-sided proper ideals $I_k$ in $R$, let $$\phi:R\left/\bigcap_{k=1}^nI_k\right.\to\prod_{k=1}^nR/I_k,\quad x\bmod \bigcap_{k=1}^nI_k\mapsto(x\bmod I_1,\cdots,x\bmod I_n)$$Then $\phi$ is an isomorphism.
  **Proof**: consider the mapping $$\phi:R\to\prod_{k=1}^nR/I_k,\quad\phi(x)=(x+I_1,\cdots,x+I_n)$$It can be verified that $\phi$ is a homomorphism with $\ker\phi=\bigcap_{k=1}^nI_k$, and further notice that $$\begin{align}R&=I_1+R^2=I_1+(I_1+I_2)(I_1+I_3)\\&\subset I_1+I_1^2+I_1I_3+I_2I_1+I_2I_3\\&\subset I_1+(I_2\cap I_3)\end{align}$$continue as above we can show that $I_k+\bigcap_{s\neq k}I_s=R$, hence for any $r_k\in R$ we can pick $$r_k=x_k+y_k\in I_k+\bigcap_{s\neq k}I_s\quad\Longrightarrow\quad r=\sum_{k=1}^nx_k\equiv r_k\pmod{I_k},\quad\forall k$$Hence $\phi(r)=(r_1+I_1,\cdots,r_n+I_n)$, proving surjectivity. By the first isomorphism theorem ([[Ring]]) $\phi$ induces an isomorphism $\varphi:R/\ker\phi\to \im\phi$ as desired.
	- **Counterexample**: coprime-ness is necessary. A simple counterexample is $$\mathbb Z/24\mathbb Z\not\cong(\mathbb Z/8\mathbb Z)\times(\mathbb Z/12\mathbb Z)$$since they're both finite with different number of elements. A more complex example is $$\mathbb Z[X]/(X^2-cX)\not\cong\mathbb Z\times\mathbb Z,\quad\forall c\in\mathbb Z_{\ge2}$$Here absence of  coprime-ness can be seen from $1\notin(X)+(X-c)$. 
	- **CRT for PID**: since any ideal in a PID is principle we know that any two ideals in PID are coprime, hence the condition for CRT can be weakened to distinct ideals. More can be found in [[Other Algebra Tools]].
	- **Discussion on commutativity of $R$**: the theorem does not require $R$ to be commutative, and the proof actually relies on the fact that $I_k+R^2=R,\forall k$, which is implied by $1\in R$ in definition ([[Ring]]). However if we're dealing with rng then the theorem may not be valid.
## Radical
In commutative $R$, the **radical** of an ideal $I$, denoted $\sqrt I$ or $\rad I$, is defined as $$\sqrt I=\set{r\in R:r^n\in I\text{ for some }n\in\mathbb Z^+}$$Intuitively, $\sqrt I$ is obtained by taking all roots of elements of $I$ within the ring. A ideal is said to be **radical** if $I=\sqrt I$. 
- Equivalently, let $\phi:R\to R/I$ the canonical quotient map, then $\sqrt I=\phi^{-1}(r(R/I))$.
- **Radical as intersection of prime ideals containing it**: we have that $$\sqrt I=\bigcap_{\mathfrak p\text{ prime},I\subset\mathfrak p\subset R}\mathfrak p$$This is because: a). all prime ideals are radical, thus the intersection contains $rad(I)$. b). choose $r\notin\sqrt I$ and let $S=\langle r\rangle$, then $S\cap\sqrt I=\varnothing$. By Krull's theorem there is a prime ideal $p$ such that $I\subset p,p\cap S=\varnothing$. This shown that $r$ is not in the intersection of prime ideals containing $I$, completing the proof.
- **Jacobson radical**: for a ring $R$, its Jacobson radical $J(R)$ is the intersection of all maximal left/right ideals. 
	- **$J(R)$ is an ideal of $R$**: we only need to show that $J(R)$ is a right ideal, i.e., $xr\in J(R),\forall x\in J(R),r\in R$. If $r\in m$ for some left maximal ideal $m$ then we're down; if there is a maximal left ideal $m$ such that $r\notin m$, then we let $m_0=\set{a\in R:ar\in m}$. It can be shown that $m_0$ is also a maximal left ideal, thus we must have $xr\in J(R)$.
	- **If $x\in J(R)$ then $1-x\in R^*$**: a non-unit element will always contained in some maximal left ideal, thus there must exists a $u$ with $u(1-x)=1$. Now we get $1-u=-ux\in J(R)$, thus by the same reasoning we have $v$ such that $vu=1\Rightarrow v=vu(1-x)=1-x$. Now we have $1=vu=(1-x)u=u(1-x)$, thus $1-x\in R^*$.
	- By a bit further discussion on the above property we get that $$J(R)=\set{x\in R:1-rx\in R^*,\forall r\in R}$$This is because for any maximal left ideal $m$ and $x\notin m$, we must have $m+Rx=R$ (otherwise LHS is also a proper ideal strictly containing the maximal ideal), thus there exists $y+rx=1$, then $y=1-rx=m\cap R^*\Rightarrow m=R$, a contradiction.
	- The above properties, combined together, shows that picking left or right ideal in the definition makes no difference.
	- If $R$ is Artinian, then $J(R)$ is nilpotent.
## Noetherian ring
A ring $R$ is  **(left-/right-)noetherian** if all its (left/right) ideals satisfies the (left/right) **ascending chain condition**: every increasing $I_1\subset I_2\subset\cdots$ has a largest elements, e.g., $I_n=I_{n+1}=\cdots$.
- **Equivalent characterization**
	- **Finite generation characterization**: $R$ is (left-/right-)Noetherian if every (left/right) ideal is finitely generated. 
	  **Proof**: for $(\Leftarrow)$, notice that any infinitely generated ideal gives rise to an infinite ascending chain that does not stabilize by $$I=(r_1,r_2,\cdots)\imply(r_1)\subset(r_1,r_2)\subset\cdots$$Conversely for $(\Rightarrow)$, existence of infinite ascending chain that does not stabilize also gives rise to a infinitely generated ideal by $$I_1\subset I_2\subset\cdots\imply I=\bigcup_{n\in\mathbb N}I_n=(r_1,r_2,\cdots)\where r_n\in I_{n}\backslash I_{n-1}$$Here the constructed ideal is not finitely generated, otherwise there exists $N\in\mathbb N$ s.t. $r_n\in I_N,\forall n>n$, which implies that $I_n=I_N,\forall n\ge N$, a contradiction. 
	- **Ideal maximal condition**: every non-empty collection of ideals of $R$ has a maximal element ([[Order]]).
	  **Proof**: $(\Leftarrow)$ is trivial by applying the ideal maximal condition to an ascending ideal chain; $(\Rightarrow)$ is also trivial by constructing a infinite ascending chain of ideals that do not stabilize using the absence of maximal element. 
- **Intuition**: noetherian ring can be seen as a generalization of PID - instead of requiring all ideals to be singly generated we're relaxing the constraint to finiteness of system of generators. It's useful because the property of being finitely generated is preserved under many constructions of new rings from old rings, (e.g., Hilbert basis theorem in [[Polynomial Ring]]), while PID does not enjoy such invariance. 