An **integral domain** is a **commutative** [[Ring]] $R$ with no nonzero zero divisor.
- **Law of cancelation**: the law of cancelation holds for integral domain, since $$ar=br\quad\iff\quad (a-b)r=0\quad\iff\quad a-b=0$$in the last equality we used the fact that $r\neq0$.
- **Field of fraction (quotient field)**: given an integral domain $R$, denote $R^*=R\backslash\{0\}$, then we define the field of fraction of $R$ as $$\Frac(R)=R\times R^*/\sim\quad\text{where}\quad(n,d)\sim(m,b)\iff nb=md$$Denote the equivalence class $(n,d)$ as $\frac{n}{d}$, then we have the operations $$\frac{n}{d}+\frac{m}{b}=\frac{nb+md}{db},\quad\frac{n}{d}\cdot\frac{m}{b}=\frac{nm}{db}$$Note that when $R$ is only commutative the $\Frac(R)$ becomes a ring of fraction.
## Properties of elements in an integral domain
- **Irreducibility**: for a nonzero non-unit $p\in R$, its irreducibility is defined as $$p\in\irr R\quad\iff\quad(p=xy)\implies(x\in R^\times\text{ or }y\in R^\times)$$Intuitively, an element is irreducible if it can only be factorized in a trivial manner (via unit).  
	- **Why non-unit**: reducibility is defined mainly for the discussion on unique factorization, and for units the question is meaningless - given any $a\in R,u\in\ R^\times$ we can always write $a=u^{-1}(ua)$, which introduces unnecessary complexity to the factorization. 
- **Prime**: $p\in R$ is prime if $p\mid xy$ implies $p\mid x$ or $p\mid y$, i.e., $(p)$ is prime given $R$ commutative.
	- **Relation between irreducibility and primeness**: for $p$ a nonzero non-unit we have that $$(p) \text{ maximal} \implies p \text{ prime}\implies p\in\irr R$$When $R$ is a PID ([[Ideal]]) then the above three conditions are equivalent.
	- **Intuition**: irreducibility and primeness could differ because:
		- **Irreducibility is an atomic property**, talking about whether an element can be broken down.
		- **Primeness is a structural property**, and governs how the element in discussion interacts with products via the ideal $(p)$. 
## Other info
- **GCD domain**: a GCD domain is an integral domain in which any two elements has a GCD, i.e., there is a unique principle ideal containing the ideal generated by two given elements.
	- **Unique factorization domain (UFD)**: 
	- **PID is GCD domain**: by definition ([[Ideal]]), any ideal in a PID is a principal ideal, hence PID is naturally a GCD domain.
	- **Ideal-intersection criterion**: $R$ is a GCD domain iff (finite) intersection of principal ideals is a principal ideal. In particular, $(a)\cap (b)=(c)$ where $c=\lcm(a,b)$.