For a **commutative** [[Ring]] $R$, the **formal power series ring** is defined as $$R[[X]]=\prod_{i\in\mathbb N} R$$with sum and product for $\alpha=(\alpha_i),\beta=(\beta_i)$ defined as $$\alpha+\beta=(\alpha_i+\beta_i),\quad\alpha\cdot\beta=\left(\sum_{k+l=i}(\alpha_k+\beta_l)\right)$$which is similar to [[Sequence]] sum and Cauchy product. The additive/multiplicative zero factors are $$0_{R[[X]]}=(0,0,\cdots),\quad1_{R[[X]]}=(1_R,0,0,\cdots)$$Note that the **indeterminate** $X$ is a **purely formal** variable that does not stand for any value.
- $R[[X]]^*=\set{\sum_{i=1}^\infty b_iX^i:b_0\in R^*}$. This can be proven by directly writing the system of equations for the identity to hold.
- **Necessity of commutativity**: without requiring commutativity of ring $R$ the same definition still works, but many desired properties will be lost, e.g., expression of product, polynomial evaluation as a ring homomorphism, etc.. For an explicit intuitive example, notice that $I_n\in M_n(\mathbb R)$ has at least $2^n$ roots, which is an extremely fatal disaster challenging unique factorization. 
	- **Polynomial ring over field**: $F[X]$ is one of the most well-behaved polynomial ring among all, and showcases many good properties like unique factorization. In comparison, in a general commutative ring an element might has no, one, two, or more, or even infinite roots or any kind. For instance, in $\mathbb Z/15\mathbb Z$ the element $1$ has more than 2 roots. 
- **Forma Laurent series**: similar to how we generalizes Taylor series ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]) to Laurent series ([[Holomorphic Function]]), we can generalize formal power series to **formal Laurent series** by allowing terms of negative powers (and, accordingly, negative indexes also).