The core idea to this method is that, since information carried by a continuous space (say, value of function on interval), although complete and rich, is hard to utilize, we instead consider to sample the values at some points, in the hope that more knowledge and tools can be used (or at least invoked by association in form).
> [!info] Finite dimensional function space
> Assume that $X\subset C([0,1])$ is a finite dimensional space of real-valued continuous function. For a sequence $\set{f_k}\subset X$, show that pointwise convergence implies uniform convergence.
- **Some intuition**: denote the basis as $\set{\phi_i}$ and coordinate expression $f_k=\sum_ia_{i,k}\phi_i$. Finite $a_{i,k}$ naturally guarantees uniform convergence, thus it suffice to rule out the cases where some $a_{i,k}$ tends to infinity. Intuitively, large value of coefficient and finite sum would "regularize" the basis into a linearly dependent fashion, thus it suffice to formalize the intuitive.
- **Sampling**: mimicking what we've done in linear algebra, consider choosing proper set of points $\set{x_i}$ such that $\det(f_k(x_i))\neq0$.
	- **Explicit construction**: first choose any $f_1(x_1)\neq0$, and perform the update $$f_k^{(2)}(x)\gets f_k(x)-\frac{f_k(x_1)}{f_1(x_1)}f_1(x),\quad k\ge2$$By linear independence there exists another $x_2$ within the updated set of functions $\set{f_k^{(2)}}_{k\ge2}$ with $f_2^{(2)}(x_2)\neq0$. Repeat the above process to get full $\set{x_i}$, then by linear independence we have $\det(f_k(x_i))\neq0$.
	- **Functional interpretation**: utilizing [[Dual Space]] we define a linear functional $$l_x:X\to\mathbb R,\quad f\mapsto f(x)$$since $\bigcap_{t\in[0,1]}\ker l_x=\set{0}$, we may choose a subset satisfying the determinant condition.
- **Linear algebra-fashioned reasoning**: for the finite and discrete subspace $x=\set{x_i}$ we get a convergence in coefficient, thus naturally yielding uniform convergence. An easier way of reasoning is to utilize the equivalence between norms on finite dimensional space, i.e.,  topologies induced by pointwise convergence and uniform convergence. [[Vector Space]]
- **Further thoughts**
	- This is also related to the uniform boundedness principle. [[Banach Space]]
	- **Balancing information loss**: notice that sampling process actually throws some information of the original objects away. This is not a problem at least in this case since uniform convergence is a **global topological property** that requires only a fraction of the information. In contrast, properties like differentiability requires more information, thus sampling method is not sufficient for tackling it (as we've seen in [[Fourier Series]] and [[FT on L1]]).
	- Shannon's sampling theorem is another example of sufficient information. [[FT on L1]]
- **Determining a function with rational points**: For two continuous functions $f,g:R\to Y$ for some Hausdorff space ([[Separation Axioms]]), we have $$f(q)=g(q),\quad\forall q\in Q\quad\Longrightarrow\quad f(r)=g(r)\quad\forall r\in R$$The essential condition is that $Q$ is dense in $R$. The general form is that, for continuous $f,g:X\to Y$ where $X,Y$ are topologies and $Y$ is Hausdorff, if $f(z)=g(z),\forall z\in Z$ for some $Z$ dense in $X$, then $f,g$ coincide for all $x\in X$.
	- **Example**: a periodic function without smallest period is either constant or everywhere discontinuous, as the period would for a dense additive group in $\mathbb R$. This also generalize to functions whose set of periods covers a complete interval.
- **Uniform approximation via polynomial with finite degree**: in [[Polynomial Approximation]] we show that $P_n$ is not dense in $C([a,b])$ in the topology induced by $L^\infty$ norm, and in the proof we utilized a sampling technique to focus on only a finite set of points. This helps to sift the most important informations out.