The **acceleration via subsequence** technique exploits the fact that even when a sequence as a whole behaves badly, one can often find a well-behaved subsequence and use it to obtain some stronger conclusions. 
Several applications are listed below:
- **Measure convergence $\nearrow\ae$ convergence**: in Riesz's theorem ([[Measurable Function]]) we use Borel-Cantelli lemma to show that a $\ae$ convergent subsequence can be extracted from a measure-convergent sequence.
- **Uniform boundedness principle**: in the alternative proof ([[Banach Space]]) we first pick a subsequence of operators whose norm blows up fast enough, and the pick elements in $V$ with geometrically decreasing distance. A blowing-up norm of $T_nv$ is realized by a simple fact deduced from triangle inequality.
- **Completeness of [[Lp Space]]**: when proving that $L^p$ space is complete we utilize the series acceleration for application of DCT to ensure integrability.
## Urysohn's subsequence principle
**Urysohn's subsequence principle**: given a topological space $(X,\mathcal T)$ ([[Point Set Topology]]) a sequence $x_n$ convergence to $x$ iff any one of its subsequence has a sub-subsequence that converges to $x$. This is obvious by definition of convergence.
- **Discussion**: this principle transforms the convergence problem of a sequence to one of its sub-subsequence. This creates some room in which the technique of subsequence acceleration can be exploited to deduce stronger result. As a conceptual generalization, for an limiting argument $P$ and a sequence of elements $\set{a_n}$ we have the following equivalence: $$P\text{ holds for }\set{a_n}\iff\text{for any }\set{a_{n(i)}}\subset\set{a_n}\text{ there exists }\set{a_{n(i,j)}}\subset\set{a_{n(i)}}\text{ for which }P\text{ holds}$$This works as long as $P$ is induced by some topology.
Some applications of this idea is listed below:
- **Measure convergence DCT**: in [[Lebesgue Integral#Basic theorems]] when generalizing DCT to convergence in measure we pick a sub-sequence whose upper bound of measure of divergent domain decays exponentially, hence Borel-Catalan lemma can be applied to get $\ae$ convergence. This allows the application of classic DCT, hence Urysohn's subsequence principle completes the proof.
- **Measure convergence iff sub-sub $\ae$ convergence**: in [[Measurable Function]] the property of measure convergence illustrate how topology can be applied.
