An **integer (linear) programming** is a specific kind of [[Linear Programming]] of the form $$\begin{array}{l}\max& c^Tx\\\text{s.t.}&Ax=b\\&x_i\in\mathbb N,\forall1\le i\le n\end{array}$$that is, the variables are restricted to (positive) integers. The above form is usually referred to as the **canonical form** of the ILP problem.
## Cutting-plane method
The cutting-plane method works by: 
1. **Solve the relaxed LP**: drop the integer requirement and solve the LP problem via the simplex method ([[Linear Programming]]).
2. **Cutting-plane**: find a hyperplane that separates the non-integer solution obtained in the first step and all other feasible solutions, and add it into the linear constraints.
	- For any line corresponding to an non-integer BFS, if it's written as $$x_b+\sum_{j\in\tilde S}a_{ij}x_j=b_i$$then the corresponding cutting-plane equation is $$\sum_{j\in\tilde S}\set{a_{ij}}x_j\ge\set{b_i}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad-\sum_{j\in\tilde S}\set{a_{ij}}x_j+s=-\set{b_j}$$where $s$ is a new slack variable.
3. **Iteration**: steps 1, 2 are repeated until an integer solution is found.
Below we go through the following example: $$\begin{array}{l}\max& z=x_2\\\st&3x_1+2x_2\le6\\&-3x_1+2x_2\le0\\&x_1,x_2\in\mathbb N\end{array}$$The simplex method can be turned into $$\begin{array}{c|cccc|c}\text{Basic}&x_1&x_2&s_1&s_2&\text{RHS}\\\hline z&0&0&-1/4&-1/4&-2/3\\\hline x_1&1&0&1/6&-1/6&1\\x_2&0&1&1/4&1/4&3/2\\ \end{array}$$at this point $3/2$ is not integer, hence we choose this line to generate the cutting-plane equation $$-\frac{1}{4}s_1-\frac{1}{4}s_2+s_3=-\frac{1}{2}$$adding this into the simplex tableau we get $$\begin{array}{c|ccccc|c}\text{Basic}&x_1&x_2&s_1&s_2&s_3&\text{RHS}\\\hline z&0&0&-1/4&-1/4&0&-2/3\\\hline x_1&1&0&1/6&-1/6&0&1\\x_2&0&1&1/4&1/4&0&3/2\\s_3&0&0&-1/4&-1/4&1&-1/2 \end{array}$$at this point we use the dual simplex method ([[Linear Programming]]) instead to get $$\begin{array}{c|ccccc|c}\text{Basic}&x_1&x_2&s_1&s_2&s_3&\text{RHS}\\\hline z&0&0&0&0&-1&-1\\\hline x_1&1&0&0&-1/3&-2/3&2/3\\x_2&0&1&0&0&1&1\\s_3&0&0&1&1&-4&2 \end{array}$$its optimal solution, hence we iterate again, find the cutting-plane equation, integrate it into the tableau, and use dual simplex method to solve the problem. The final optimal solution is $(1,1)$.
## Branch and bound method
The main idea of the branch and bound method is to gradually decrease the feasible domain until an integer optimal solution can be found. There are two key aspects in this method:
- **Branching**: if in an optimal solution to the relaxed LP problem there are non-integer component $x_k^0$, then we can immediately separate the feasible domain into two parts: $$x_k\le[x_k^0]\quad\text{or}\quad x_k\ge[x_k^0]+1$$if we add each of them into the original ILP $P_0$ to get two sub-problems $P_1,P_2$, then we can iterate the procedure again on $P_1,P_2$ respectively to find further solutions. The branching procedure will stop at one leave node only when an integer optimal solution is found.
- **Bounding**: the branching procedure along only guarantees that an optimal solution can be found, but would usually consume a lot of time. Instead, if at any point we get an integer solution with value $z_0$, while a node to be branched has optimal solution $z_1$ for its relaxed LP, as long as $z_0<z_1$ we immediately know that optimal node cannot lie beneath the node.
In actual calculation there are some rules of thumb:
1. **which node to pick**: usually we will prioritize the node with better optimal solution. Further, we'll usually choose to move along one branch until every it terminates with all possible leaves, then we'll move on to the other branch, and use bound to cut unnecessary leaves.