**Intuition**: holomorphic functional calculus is a generalization of [[Holomorphic Function]] and [[Contour Integral]] to [[Operator on Hilbert Space]], in the way that images of a function is allowed to take value from a Banach algebra (consisting of operators). 

---
Given a [[Banach Algebra]] $A$ over $\mathbb C$ and $f:U\to A$ where $U\subset\mathbb C$ is open, we say that $f$ is 
- **Holomorphic** in $U$ if $\lim_{z\to w}\frac{f(z)-f(w)}{z-w}$exists for all $w\in U$.
- **Weakly holomorphic** on $U$ if $\phi\circ f:U\to\mathbb C$ is holomorphic in the usual [[Complex Function]] sense for all $\phi\in A^*$.
The above two concepts are actually equivalent due to linearity and continuity of functional. Intuitively this is due to the separating property of [[Topological Dual Space]] of Banach space.
- **Liouville's theorem**: if $f:\mathbb C\to A$ is holomorphic and bounded, then it's constant. This follows directly from the usual Liouville's theorem ([[Cauchy Integral]]) via weak holomorphicity.
- **Integral**: given $f:[a,b]\to A$ define its **Riemann sum** w.r.t $P=\set{a=a_0\le\cdots\le a_n=b}$ as $$R(f,P)=\sum_{k=1}^n(a_k-a_{k-1})f(a_k)$$We say that $f$ is integrable if there exists $t\in A$ s.t. $$\lim_{n\to\infty}R(f,P_n)=t,\quad\forall\|P_n\|=\max_k|a_{k}-a_{k-1}|\to0$$We adapt the usual notations from [[Riemann Integral]].
	- **Interchangeability with functional**: for $f\in C([a,b])$ we have $$\phi\left(\int_a^bf\right)=\int_a^b\phi\circ f,\quad\forall\phi\in\mathcal B(A,A')$$by linearity of $\phi$ and Riemann sum definition.
	- **Linearity**: $t\left(\int_a^bf\right)=\left(\int_a^bf\right)t=\int_a^b(tf)$ for all $t\in A$ by Riemann sum definition.
	- **Path integral**: similar to [[Contour Integral]] we define the path integral via parametrization of contour.
- **Cauchy's integral theorem**: consider $U\subset\mathbb C$ open and nonempty, $f:U\to A$ holomorphic, and $\Delta$ a closed contour in $U$ with $I(\Delta,w)=0,\forall w\in\mathbb C\backslash U$, then $\int_\Delta f=0$, with $$I(\Delta,w)f(w)=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta\frac{f(z)}{z-w}dz,\quad\forall w\in U\backslash\Delta$$**Proof**: interchangeability with functional and results in [[Cauchy Integral]] implies $$\phi\left(\int_\Delta f\right)=\int_\Delta\phi\circ f=0,\quad\phi\left(I(\Delta,w)f(w)\right)=\phi\left(\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta\frac{f(z)}{z-w}dz\right),\quad\forall\phi\in A^*$$Since $A$ is separated by $A^*$ ([[Topological Dual Space]]), the result follows immediately.
## Basic theory
**Generalized Cauchy integral for polynomials**: given $\Delta$ encircling $\sigma(t)$ we have $$\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta p(z)R_t(z)dz=p(t),\quad\forall p\in\mathbb C[t]$$**Proof**: by linearity it suffices to consider $p(z)=z^k,k\in\mathbb N$. By Cauchy's Integral theorem above we may pick $\Delta=\set{z:|z|=b>\left\|t\right\|}$, hence by the series expression of $R_t$ ([[Spectrum]]) we have $$\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta z^kR_t(z)dz=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta \left(\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}z^{k-1-n}t^n\right)dz=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\int_\Delta z^{k-1-n}t^ndz=t^k$$where interchangeability of sum and integral is guaranteed by uniform convergence on compact set $\Delta$. This completes the proof.
**Generalized Cauchy integral**: given $\sigma(t)\subset U\subset\mathbb C$ where $U$ open we take $\Delta\subset U\backslash\sigma(t)$. We define $$f(t)=\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta f(z)R_t(z)dz,\quad\forall f\in\mathcal O(U)$$Then several properties below are satisfied, making holomorphic functional calculus valid.
- **Well-defined**: the integral converges, since $f(z)R_t(z)$ is holomorphic in a neighborhood of $\Delta$ by property of $R_t$ ([[Spectrum]]). The value of $f(t)$ is independent of $\Delta$ by Cauchy's integral theorem above.
	- **Multifunction**: functions like $\ln t,t^{1/n}$ need special treatment ([[Complex Function]]). For these functions it suffices to show that a specific branch can be picked for definition of $\Delta$, and this can done via a simple construction.
- **Homomorphism property**: we have $$(af+bg)(t)=af(t)+bg(t),\quad (fg)(t)=f(t)g(t)=g(t)f(t),\quad\forall a,b\in\mathbb C,f,g\in\mathcal O(U)$$**Proof**: linearity is obvious, and for the product rule we denote $\Omega$ a contour encircling $\sigma(t)$ in the interior of $\Delta$, then by the resolvent equation ([[Spectrum]]) and other related results $$\begin{align}(2\pi i)^2f(t)g(t)&=\int_\Delta\int_\Omega f(z)R_t(z)g(w)R_t(w)dzdw\\&=\int_\Delta\int_\Omega f(z)g(w)\frac{R_t(w)-R_t(z)}{z-w}dzdw\\&=\int_\Delta\int_\Omega f(z)g(w)\frac{R_t(w)}{z-w}dzdw+\int_\Delta\int_\Omega f(z)g(w)\frac{R_t(z)}{w-z}dzdw\\&=\int_\Omega\left(\int_\Delta\frac{f(z)}{z-w}dz\right)g(w)R_t(w)dw+\int_\Delta f(z)R(z)\left(\int_\Omega\frac{g(w)}{w-z}dw\right)dz\\&=(2\pi i)^2(fg)(t)+0\end{align}$$This establishes $f(t)g(t)=(fg)(t)$, and a symmetric reasoning yields the other half.
	- If $f=p/q\in\mathcal O(U)$ we know that $f(t)=p(t)q(t)^{-1}=q(t)^{-1}p(t)$.
- **Continuity**: if $f_n\to f$ uniformly on all compact $K\subset U$ then $f_n(t)\to f(t)$, while follows directly from interchangeability of limit and integral guaranteed by uniform convergence.
- **Taylor series**: if $f\in\mathcal O(U)$ can be written as $f(z)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}a_n(z-a)^n$ ([[Holomorphic Function]]) we also have $f(t)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}a_n(t-ae)^n$. This follows from continuity above by considering its truncation to the first $k$ terms.
- **Spectral mapping theorem**: $f\circ\sigma(t)=\sigma\circ f(t),\forall f\in\mathcal O(U)$. We can either reason as in [[Spectrum]] for polynomials, or we can also use continuity and uniform convergence ([[Complex Series]]) to directly generalize that result. 
- **Composition property**: $(g\circ f)(t)=g(f(t)),\forall f\in\mathcal O(U),g\in\mathcal O(f(U))$.
  **Proof**: pick $\Omega$ encircling $\sigma\circ f(t)$ and $\Delta$ encircling $\sigma(t)$ we have $$\begin{align}2\pi i g(f(t))&=\int_\Omega g(w)R_{f(t)}(w)dw\\&=\int_\Omega g(w)(we-f(t))^{-1}dw&\text{definition of }R_t\\&=\int_\Omega g(w)\left(\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Delta\frac{R_t(z)}{w-f(z)}dz\right)dw&\text{Cauchy's integral formula}\\&=\int_\Delta\left(\frac{1}{2\pi i}\int_\Omega\frac{g(w)}{w-f(z)}dw\right)R_t(z)dz\\&=\int_\Delta (g\circ f)(z)R_t(z)dz&\text{Cauchy's integral formula}\\&=(g\circ f)(t)&\text{definition}\end{align}$$We're essentially using Cauchy's integral formula to bridge between functional calculus to function calculus. 