Given a [[Vector Space]]  over a [[Field]], a **norm** on $V$ is a map $\|\cdot\|:V\to\mathbb R$ satisfying:
1. **Positive definiteness**: $\|v\|\ge0,\forall v\in V$, and $\|v\|=0\iff v=0$.
	- **Seminorm**: a norm without positive definiteness is called a seminorm. A seminorm is usually denoted $p(\cdot)$ or $[\cdot]$ to distinguish from the absolute value $|\cdot|$.
2. **Absolute homogeneity**: $\|\lambda v\|=|\lambda|\cdot\|v\|,\forall\lambda\in F,v\in V$. Here $|\cdot|$ is the absolute value([[Field]]). 
	- **Norm of zero vector**: by absolute homogeneity we can easily deduce that $\|0\|=0$.
3. **Triangle inequality**: $\|v+w\|\le\|v\|+\|w\|,\forall v,w\in V$.
	- **Convexity**: every norm is convex by triangle inequality. Conversely any function that is homogeneous and convex immediately satisfies the triangle inequality.
	- **Non-negativity**: since by triangle inequality we have $$0=\|0\|=\|x-x\|\le\|x\|+\|-x\|=2\|x\|\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\|x\|\ge0$$hence triangle inequality along already ensures non-negativity.
	- **Inverted triangle inequality**: we can easily deduce that $|\|x\|-\|y\||\le\|x-y\|$.
	- **Continuity**: every norm is continuous since $$v_n\to v\quad\Longrightarrow\quad|\|v_n\|-\|v\||\le\|v_n-v\|\to0$$the first inequality is exactly the triangle inequality.
The definition of normed space naturally requires $V$ to be linear. However a general topological vector space is not necessarily normable. [[Point Set Topology]]
- **Characterization of seminorm via unit ball**: take the unit ball under the seminorm $p(\cdot)$ as  $$B=\set{v\in V:p(v)\le 1}$$then it's convex, balanced, and absorbing, and also satisfies $p(v)=\inf\set{\alpha:\alpha>0,\alpha^{-1}v\in B}$. Conversely, any convex, balanced, absorbing set $B$ unique determines a seminorm that takes $B$ as the unit ball by the **Minkowski's gauge function** $$p_B(v)=\inf\set{\alpha:\alpha>0,\alpha^{-1}v\in B}$$**Proof**: $\Rightarrow$ is easy to verify from definition of seminorm. For $\Leftarrow$, by definition for any fixed $v\in V$ and $\varepsilon>0$ there exists $\alpha_v>0,\alpha_v^{-1}v\in B$ s.t. $p_B(v)+\varepsilon>\alpha_v$., hence by convexity we have $$\frac{\alpha_v}{\alpha_v+\alpha_u}\frac{v}{\alpha_v}+\frac{\alpha_u}{\alpha_v+\alpha_u}\frac{u}{\alpha_u}=\frac{v+v}{\alpha_v+\alpha_u}\in B\quad\Longrightarrow\quad p_B(v+u)\le\alpha_v+\alpha_u\le p_B(v)+p_B(u)+2\varepsilon$$by arbitrariness of $\varepsilon$ we have $p_B(v+u)\le p_B(v)+p_B(u)$, which is the triangle inequality. For absolute homogeneity, we can utilize absorbing property and definition to separate $\lambda$ out of the infimum.
	- **Balanced set**: $X\subset V$ is balanced if $v\in X,|\alpha|\le1$ implies $\alpha v\in X$.
	- **Absorbing set**: $X\subset V$ is absorbing if $\forall v\in V$ there exists $\varepsilon_v>0$ st. $\alpha v\in X,\forall0<|\alpha|\le\varepsilon_v$.
	- **Characterization of norm via unit ball**: if we assume further that any for any $v\in V$ there exists one corresponding $\alpha_v>0$ s.t. $\alpha_v^{-1}v\in B$, then the induced Minkowski's gauge function is a norm.
- **Schauder basis**: for a normed vector space $V$ over $F$ (or generally a TVS) a Schauder basis is a countable set $\set{s_n}_{n\in\mathbb N}$ s.t. any $v\in V$ has a **unique Schauder-span** $$v=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\alpha_ns_n,\quad\alpha_n\in F$$the convergence is implicitly that of the ambient topology ([[Point Set Topology]]), but can be reduced to only weak convergence in normed vector space (e.g. [[Banach Space]]).
	- Unique representation is crucial in the definition. For counterexamples of non-unique representations, see [[Hilbert Space]].
- **Sum of (semi)norms**: let $\|\cdot\|_a$ be a norm and $|\cdot|_b$ be a seminorm, then $\|\cdot\|_c=\|\cdot\|_a+|\cdot|_b$ is a norm. This is obvious since all required conditions are satisfied, and positive definiteness is guaranteed by that of $\|\cdot\|_a$ and non-negativity of $|\cdot|_b$.
- **Completeness**: completeness of a norm is defined as the completeness of the metric it induces, making the vector space into a [[Metric Space]]
	- **Completeness under equivalent norms**: two equivalent norms induces metrics of the same completeness property.
	  **Proof**: for two equivalent norms it's obvious that a sequence in the vector space is Cauchy in one norm iff it's Cauchy in another, and the notion of convergence are also identical, hence completeness is preserved under equivalent norms.
		- **Topological intuition**: in contrast to a general metric space, completeness of normed vector space depends entirely on its topological property.
		- **Discussion**: I've previously seen the statement that *Completeness is an invariant of isomorphism in the category of normed space*.
- **Heine-Borel theorem**: for a finite dimensional normed vector space $(X,\|\cdot\|)$, a subset $K$ is sequentially compact (which is equivalent to compact in a normed vector space as a [[Metric Space]]) iff it's closed and bounded. 
  **Proof**: by [[Metric Space]] a compact set is complete and totally bounded, hence closed and bounded. Conversely, since any bounded sequence in $X$ has a convergent subsequence, we further use closed-ness to ensure that the limit is inside $K$, so $K$ is sequentially compact, which implies compactness.
- **Riesz's lemma**: given $Y$ a closed proper vector subspace of normed vector space $(X,\|\cdot\|)$ and any $\alpha\in(0,1)$, there exists $u\in X,\|u\|=1$ s.t. $$\|u-v\|\ge\alpha,\quad\forall v\in Y$$**Proof**: given $\alpha\in(0,1)$, since $Y$ is closed and proper we can pick $u\notin Y,\|u\|=1$ satisfying $d(u,Y)>0$, and by definition there exists the corresponding $y\in Y$ s.t. $$d(u,Y)\le\|u-y\|\le\frac{d(u,Y)}{\alpha}$$Now consider the point on the unit ball $$w=\frac{u-y}{\|u-y\|}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\|w-v\|=\frac{\left\|u-y-\|u-y\|\cdot v\right\|}{\|u-y\|}\ge d(u,Y)\cdot\frac{\alpha}{d(u,Y)}=\alpha,\quad\forall v\in Y$$hence $w$ is exactly the point.
- **Coordinate norm is weaker**: for any linearly independent ([[Vector Space]]) $x_i,1\le i\le n$ there exists a constant $\mu>0$ s.t. $$\mu\sum_{i=1}^n|\alpha_i|\le\left\|\sum_{i=1}^n\alpha_ix_i\right\|,\quad\forall\alpha_i\in\mathbb R$$**Proof**: denote $$\mu=\inf\Set{\left\|\sum_{i=1}^n\alpha_ix_i\right\|:\sum_{i=1}^n\left|\alpha_i\right|=1}$$then it suffices to show that $\mu>0$. To this end, by definition of infimum ([[Series]]) we can pick a sequence of coordinates $\alpha^k=(\alpha_1^k,\cdots,\alpha_n^k)$ s.t. $$\sum_{i=1}^n|\alpha_i^k|=1,\forall k\quad\text{and }\quad\lim_{k\to\infty}\left\|\sum_{i=1}^n\alpha_i^kx_i\right\|=\mu$$now since $|\alpha_i^k|<1$ we can pick a convergent subsequence by completeness of [[Real Number System]] with limit $\beta_i$, and by a simple estimation we can show that $$\mu=\left\|\sum_{i=1}^n\beta_ix_i\right\|>0$$which follows from linear independence of $x_i$. 
 
## Equivalence of norms
Two norms $\|\cdot\|_a,\|\cdot\|_b$, are said to be **equivalent** if their induced metrics generates the same [[Metric Topology]]. Equivalently, there exist $c,C>0$ s.t. $$c\|v\|_a\le\|v\|_b\le C\|v\|_a,\forall v\in V$$**Proof**: $\Leftarrow$ is just that Lipschitz equivalence is stronger than topological equivalence ([[Metric Space]]). For $\Rightarrow$, assume otherwise that for any $n\in\mathbb N$ there exists $v_n\in V$ with $\|v_n\|_b>n\|v_n\|_a$, then define $$v_n'=\frac{v_n}{n\|v_n\|_a}\quad\Longrightarrow\quad\|v_n'\|_a=\frac{1}{n},\quad\|v_n'\|_b=\frac{\|v_n\|_b}{n\|v_n\|_a}\ge1$$hence $v_n'\to0$ under $\|\cdot\|_a$ while lies outside the unit ball under $\|\cdot\|_b$, contradicting the fact that two norms induces the same topology. This ensures that desired $C$ exists, and by an entirely analogous argument we can prove that $c$ also exists.
- **Discussion**: the above is basically saying that, for normed vector space topological equivalence and Lipschitz equivalence are the same. This is stronger than the case in [[Metric Space]], and is mainly due to the linearity structure of the space itself - we're allowed to construct new elements via scaling, and this posses more constrains on the norm structure itself.
- **Stronger norm**: sometimes for two non-equivalent norms we can talk about their "relative strength" - $\|\cdot\|a$ is stronger than $\|\cdot\|_b$ is the topology induced by $\|\cdot\|_a$ is finer than that induced by $\|\cdot\|_b$ ([[Point Set Topology]]). By the proof above we obviously have that $$\|\cdot\|_a\text{ is stronger than }\|\cdot\|_b\quad\iff\quad\|\cdot\|_b\le C\|\cdot\|a$$and obviously, two norms are equivalent iff each on is stronger than another.
- **Equivalent vector spaces**: equivalence of vector spaces is defined as equivalence of norms under linear operator.
- **Finite dimensional space**: any two norms on $\dim_FV<\infty$ are equivalent.
  **Proof**: it suffice to show $\|\cdot\|_a=\|\cdot\|_{\ell^1}$ ([[Lp Space]]) by transitivity. By triangle inequality any $\|\cdot\|_a$ is continuous under the topology induced by $\|\cdot\|_{\ell^1}$, while the unit sphere is closed and bounded, hence compact by Heine-Borel theorem (above). Now we can apply the extreme value theorem ([[Differential Calculus on Euclidean Space]]) to pick $$c=\min_{\|u\|_1=1}\|u\|_a,\quad C=\max_{\|u\|_1=1}\|u\|_a$$then the desired inequality naturally follows. 
	- **Alternative proof**: if we start with the result above that coordinate norm is weaker than the original norm, it suffices to show that the inverted inequality also holds, which is just a simple application of the triangle inequality. 
- **Infinite dimensional space**: if $(V,\|\cdot\|_1)$ is an infinite dimensional Banach space, then there exists a discontinuous linear functional $\phi:V\to\mathbb R$. Take $u\in V$ such that $\phi(u)=1$, then $Sx:=x-2\phi(x)u$ defines a linear, discontinuous map $S:V\to V$ and $S^2=I$. Thus $\|x\|_2:\|Sx\|_1$ defines a complete norm on $V$ which is not equivalent to $\|\cdot\|_1$.