For $V$ a topological [[Vector Space]] over [[Field]] $F$, its **topological dual space** is defined as $$V^*=\mathcal C(V,F)=\set{\ell\in\mathcal L(V,F):\ell\text{ continuous}}$$This is obviously a subspace of its [[Algebraic Dual Space]] $V^\#$, and any $\ell\in V^*$ is called a **continuous linear functional**. Note that by discussion in [[Banach Space]] a functional is bounded iff it's continuous, that is, $$V^*=\mathcal C(V,F)=\mathcal B(V,F)$$It's for this reason that we'll conventionally use $\mathcal B(V,F)$ as alternative notation for $V^*$. Note that in this note we'll assume further that $V$ is a [[Normed Vector Space]] over $\mathbb R$ or $\mathbb C$. 
- **[[Banach Space]] structure**: for any $V$ normed, $V^*$ is Banach with its operator norm. 
  **Proof**: obviously $V^*$ is a normed vector space with operator norm defined as $$\|T\|=\sup_{v\in V,\|v\|=1}\|Tv\|_F$$For completeness, pick a Cauchy sequence $\set{T_n}\subset V^*$, then for any fixed $v\in V$ we have $$|T_m(v)-T_n(v)|\le\|T_m-T_n\|\cdot\|v\|$$hence $\set{T_n(v)}$ is Cauchy, and by completeness of $F$ we can define $$T(v)=\lim_{n\to\infty}T_n(v),\quad\forall v\in V$$We can easily verify that $T\in V^*$, and the convergence $T_n\to T$ is also valid.  
- **Riesz representation theorem**: for $\ell\in\mathcal H^*$ where $\mathcal H$ is a [[Hilbert Space]] there exists a unique $v\in\mathcal H$ s.t. $\ell(u)=\langle u,v\rangle,\forall u$, and moreover $\|\ell\|=\|v\|$.
  **Proof**: consider $S=\ker\ell$, which is closed by continuity. Assume $S\neq\mathcal H$ (otherwise $v=0$) and pick $h\in S^\perp,\|h\|=1$, then it can be verified that $v=\overline{\ell(h)}h$ satisfies the requirements. Norm and uniqueness are obvious.
	- **Intuition**: for $\mathcal H$ separable we can directly take an orthonormal basis $\set{e_n}$ and define $v=\sum\overline{\ell(e_n)}e_n$. The proof above just generalize this idea to general Hilbert space.
## Topological Consequences of Hahn-Banach
While the extension mechanism in [[Algebraic Dual Space]] is purely algebraic, the consequences for normed spaces are profound.
- **Norm-preserving extension**: since $V$ already has a norm, we can define the operator norm for $V^*$ ([[Banach Space]]), and by applying HBT to $$p(x)=\|f_0\|_{V_0}\|x\|$$which is a seminorm that dominates $|f|$, we can get an extension $f$ of $f_0$ with $\|f\|=\|f_0\|$.
- **Separating points**: the norm topology on a Banach space is completely "seen" by its dual. Formally, for $v,w\in V$ we have $$v=w\quad\iff\quad\phi(v)=\phi(w),\forall\phi\in V^*$$We say that $V^*$ separates the points in $V$.
    - **Corollary**: if $\phi(v) = 0$ for all $\phi \in V^*$, then $v=0$.