**Motivation**: in topology the key concept we wanna maintain is **nearness** between elements. This explains why we only require closeness under finite intersection, since infinite intersection might end up a singleton, and it makes no sense to say that a point it near itself. Meanwhile arbitrary  union is required because it's a desired property for **openness** (e.g., in $\mathbb R$, and more generally in [[Set Theory]]).
- **General discussion**: the concept of "nearness in space" is rather widely applicable, hence making topology already applied in many other fields out of math, e.g., topological epistemology. 
- **Difference with [[Measure]] space**: for a measure space we require closeness under countable intersection, union, and complement, since they're desired properties to talk about the concept of **size** and its behavior under aforementioned operations.

--- 
A **topology** on a set $X$ is a collection $\mathcal{T}\subset\mathcal P(X)$ having the following properties:
- $\varnothing,X\in\mathcal{T}$.
- $\bigcup_{A\in\mathcal A}\in\mathcal{T}$ where $\mathcal A\subset\mathcal T$ is arbitrary.
- $\bigcap_{A\in\mathcal A}A\in\mathcal{T}$ where $\mathcal A\subset\mathcal T$ is finite.
The pair $(X,\mathcal T)$ is called a **topological space**. $A\in\mathcal{T}$ are called **open set**, and $X-A$ is called **closed**.
- **Comparability**: for two topologies $\mathcal{T},\mathcal{T}'$ on $X$, if $\mathcal{T}'\subset\mathcal{T}$ then $\mathcal{T}$ is **finer** than $\mathcal{T}'$, and $\mathcal{T}'$ is **coarser** than $\mathcal{T}$. These two topologies are said to be **comparable**.
- **Intersection of topologies**: let $\set{\mathcal T_\alpha}$ be a family of topologies on $X$, then $\bigcap\mathcal T_\alpha$ is also a topology. This is the unique largest topology contained in every $\mathcal T_\alpha$.
- **Union of topologies**: let $\set{\mathcal T_\alpha}$ be a family of topologies on $X$, then $\bigcup\mathcal T_\alpha$ may not be a topology. But if we consider $\mathcal T$ generated by $\bigcup\mathcal T_\alpha$, then we get a unique smallest topology containing every $\mathcal T_\alpha$.
- **Structure of closed sets**: it can be easily shown that closed set is closed under arbitrary intersection and finite union. Actually we can specify a topology by specifying all closed sets satisfying the above properties.
- **Interior and closure**: we define the interior and closure as $$\operatorname{int} A=\bigcup_{B\in\mathcal T_X,B\subset A}B,\quad\overline A=\bigcap_{B\notin\mathcal T_X,A\subset B}B$$by definition we have $\int A\subset A\subset \overline A$.
- **Limit point**: $x\in A$ is a limit point if $$(B_x\cap A)\backslash \set{x}\neq\varnothing,\quad\forall B_x\ni x$$Set of limit point is denoted $A'$. We have $\overline A=A\cup A'$.
- **Dense subset**: $A\subset X$ is dense if any one of the following equivalent conditions are satisfied:
  - The smallest closed subset of $X$ containing $A$ is $X$ itself.
  - The closure of $A$ in $X$ i s equal to $X$.
- **Separability**: $(X,\mathcal T)$ is separable if it contains a countable ([[Set Theory]]) dense subset. 
	- Note that this has nothing to do with [[Separation Axioms]] except that they're both named after the intuition of separating things.
## Basis of a topology
A **basis** for a topology on $X$ is a collection $\mathcal{B}\subset\mathcal T$ ($B\in\mathcal B$ is called **basis elements**) such that:
- $X=\bigcup_{B\in\mathcal B}B$.
- If $x\in B_1\cap B_2$, then there exists $B_3$ s.t. $x\in B_3\subset B_1\cap B_2$.
For a basis $\mathcal{B}$, the **topology $\mathcal{T}$ generated by $\mathcal{B}$** consists of all subsets $U$ of $X$ that, for each $x\in U$, there is a basis element $B\in\mathcal{B}$ satisfying $x\in B\subset U$. i.e., $\mathcal T_{\mathcal B}$ is the intersection of all topologies that contains $\mathcal B$.
- **Equivalent definition**: $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis of topology $(X,\mathcal{T})$ if $$\mathcal T=\Set{\bigcup_{i\in I}B_i:B_i\in B,I\text{ being any  index set}}$$Thus every open set in $X$ can be expressed as a union of basis elements, though the expression may not be unique (which differs from that in [[Vector Space]]).
	- A basis uniquely determines a topology, but a topology might have multiple different bases.
- **Comparison using basis**: Let $\mathcal{B},\mathcal{B}'$ be basis for $\mathcal{T},\mathcal{T}'$, then $\mathcal{T}'$ is finer than $\mathcal{T}$ iff for each pair $x\in B\in\mathcal B$ there is a basis element $B'\in\mathcal{B}'$ such that $x\in B'\subset B$.
- **Subbasis**: a collection $\mathcal{S}\subset\mathcal P(X)$ is a subbasis of $X$ if $X=\bigcup\mathcal S$. The **topology generated by the subbasis** $\mathcal{S}$ is the collection $\mathcal{T}$ of all unions of finite intersections of elements of $\mathcal{S}$.
	- A subbasis does not require closeness under intersection, which is remedied when defining the generated topology.
## Common topologies
- **Product topology**: for topological spaces $X,Y$, the product topology $\mathcal T_{X\times Y}$ is the topology generated by $\mathcal B_{X\times Y}=\mathcal B_X\times\mathcal B_Y$ (or equivalently, generated by $\mathcal B_{X\times Y}=X\times Y$).
	- **Subbasis of product topology**: let $\pi_1,\pi_2$ be natural projections onto $X,Y$, then $$\mathcal S=\set{\pi_1^{-1}(U):U\in\mathcal T_X}\cup\set{\pi_2^{-1}(V):V\in\mathcal T_Y}$$is a subbasis for $\mathcal T_{X\times Y}$. Note that $\pi_1^{-1}(U)=U\times Y$.
	- **General definition**: let $\pi_\alpha$ be projection, then the topology generated by the subbasis $$\mathcal S=\Set{\pi_\alpha^{-1}(U_\alpha):U_\alpha\in\mathcal T_\alpha,\alpha\in J}$$is called the product topology of $\set{(X_\alpha,\mathcal T_\alpha)}_{\alpha\in J}$. 
		- **Basis**: sub-collection of $\prod\mathcal B_\alpha$ where $B_\alpha=X_\alpha$ for all but finitely many $\alpha$ is a basis for the product topology.
		- Notice that only finite intersection is allowed in topological space, hence any element in product topology will have all but finitely many coordinates s.t. $U_\alpha=X_\alpha$.
	- **Definition via continuous function**: product topology is the coarsest topology in which all projections $\pi_\alpha$ are continuous.
- **Box topology**: for topological spaces $\set{(X_\alpha,\mathcal T_\alpha)}_{\alpha\in J}$, the topology generated by the basis $$\mathcal B=\Set{\prod_{\alpha\in J}U_\alpha:U_\alpha\in\mathcal T_\alpha}$$is called the **box topology**.
	- **Basis**: $\mathcal B=\prod\mathcal B_\alpha$ qualifies as a basis for the product topology.
	- **Relation with product topology**: two topologies agree on finite cartesian product, but on infinite ones the box topology is finer than product topology.
> [!note] Preference for product topology over box topology
> Many properties of finite product topology holds for both infinite product topology and box topology, but differences arises when considering continuity: 
> Let $f:A\to\prod X_\alpha$ given by $f(a)=(f_\alpha(a))_{\alpha\in J}$, then in product topology $f$ is continuous iff each $f_\alpha$ is continuous, but in box topology $\Leftarrow$ becomes a problem, since infinite intersection of open sets may result in a singleton.
- **Subspace topology**: for topological space $(X,\mathcal{T_X})$ and a **subspace** $Y\subset X$, the collection $\mathcal{T}_Y=\{Y\cap U|U\in \mathcal{T_X}\}$ is a topology on $Y$, called the **subspace topology**.
	- $\mathcal B_Y=\set{B\cap Y:B\in\mathcal T_X}$ is a basis for $\mathcal T_Y$.
	- **Relation with product topology**: for $A,B$ subspaces of $X,Y$, then the product topology $\mathcal T_{A\times B}$ is the same as the subspace topology that $A\times B$ inherits as a subspace of $X\times Y$.
	- **Inheritance of openness/closeness**: for $Y\subset X$, $B\in Y$ is open/closed iff $B=A\cap Y$ where $A\in X$ is open/closed.
- **Quotient topology**: a surjective $f:X\to Y$ is called a quotient map if $V\subset Y$ is open iff $f^{-1}(V)$ is open. Given space $(X,\mathcal T_X)$, set $A$ and function $f:X\to A$, the unique topology $\mathcal T_A$ that makes $f$ a quotient map is called the quotient topology.
	- **Quotient space**: let $X^*$ be a partition of $X$, then $f:X\to X^*$ that maps every point to the subset containing it induces a quotient topology. We call $(X^*,\mathcal T_{X^*})$ the quotient space.
## Continuous function
> [!note] Intuition behind topological definition of continuity
> In real analysis we use the $\varepsilon$-$\delta$ language to measure continuity ([[Function on Euclidean Space]]), and the more deeper intuition is that **continuity should preserve limit**. Since "imprecise" nearness is measured by openness in topology, this generalize naturally to topological definition of continuity.

For topological spaces $X,Y$ and $f:X\to Y$, the following are equivalent:
1. $f\in C(X,Y)$.
2. For every $A\subset X,f(\overline{A})\subset\overline{f(A)}$.
3. For every open (closed) $B\subset Y$, the set $f^{-1}(B)$ is open (closed) in $X$.
4. For each $x\in X$ and each neighborhood $V$ of $f(x)$ within $\im f$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U)\subset V$.
If condition 4) holds for the point $x$ then $f$ is continuous at point $x$.
- **Structure of $C(X,Y)$**: $C(X,Y)$ is closed under addition, multiplication, quotient, composition, domain restriction, image restriction/expansion, etc.
	- **Pasting Lemma**: Let $X=A\cup B$ be the union of two closed sets (or open sets) $A$ and $B$. If $f:A\to Y$ and $g:B\to Y$ are continuous, and if $f|_{A\cap B} = g|_{A\cap B}$, then the function $h:X\to Y$ defined by $h(x) = f(x)$ for $x\in A$ and $h(x)=g(x)$ for $x\in B$ is continuous.
	- **Vector-valued function**: $f:A\to X\times Y$ given by $f(a)=(f_1(a),f_2(a))$ is continuous iff the **coordinate functions** $f_1,f_2$ are continuous.
- **Content of $\im f$**: the above equivalent definitions only impose certain properties on sets **without specifying their existence**. It might happen that $\im f$ doesn't even contain an open set, say the constant function.
- **Change of topology**: for continuous $f:X\to Y$, making either  $\mathcal T_X$ coarser (deleting nearness relation in domain) or $\mathcal T_Y$ finer (adding nearness relation in image) may destroy continuity.
- **Homeomorphism**: if both the function $f$ and $f^{-1}$ are continuous, then $f$ is called a homeomorphism. (corresponds to isomorphism in [[Group]])
	- **Counterexample**: a continuous bijection may not be homeomorphism, say, for $f:[0,1)\to\set{x^2+y^2=1}$ given by $f(t)=(\cos 2\pi t,\sin 2\pi t)$ the inverse $f^{-1}$ is not continuous.
	- **Topological property**: homeomorphism gives a bijective correspondence not only between $X,Y$ but also between $\mathcal T_X,\mathcal T_Y$. Any property of $X$ that is entirely expressed in terms of the topology of $X$ yields, via the correspondence $f$, the corresponding property of $Y$. Such property of $X$ is called a topological property.
	- **Topological imbedding**: an injective $f$ that is bijective on the restricted image, then it is a topological imbedding.
## Connectedness
A **separation** of a topological space $X$ is a pair $(U,V)$ of disjoint non-empty open subsets s.t. $X=U\cup V$. A space $X$ where a separation does not exist is called **connected**.
- **Topology dependence**: whether a space is connected or not depends on the underlying topology, i.e., what sets are considered open.
- **Linear continuum**: a simply ordered set $L$ is called a linear continuum if $L$ has the least upper bound property, and for each $x<y$ there exists $z\in L$ s.t. $x<z<y$.
	- **Connectedness**: a linear continuum is connected in the order topology, and so are intervals and rays.
- **Path**: a path between $x,y\in X$ is a continuous map $f:[a,b]\to X$ s.t. $f(a)=x,f(b)=y$. $X$ is called **path connected** if every $(x,y)\in X\times X$ can be joint by a path in $X$.
	- **Relation with connectedness**: path connected space is connected, but not vise versa. Say, consider the ordered square topology $I_o^2$ (consisting of $(x,y)\in[0,1]\times[0,1]$ and ordered by $(x,y)\prec(u,v)\iff(x<u)\lor(x=u\land y<v)$).
	- **Topologist's since curve**: let $S=\set{x\times\sin(1/x):0<x\le1}$ and consider $\overline S$. We have that $\overline S=S\cup(0\times[-1,1])$. It's connected but not path connected.
- **Component**: given $X$ and equivalent relation $\sim$ defined by $x\sim y$ if both are contained in the same connected subspace, then the equivalent classes are called **components** of $X$.
	- **Path component**: define another equivalent relation by path connectedness, then the resulting equivalent classes are called **path components**.
## Compactness
A space $X$ is **compact** if each open covering has a finite sub-covering.
- **Compactness of subspace**: subspace $Y$ is compact iff every covering of $Y$ by sets open in $X$ has a finite sub-covering that covers $Y$, due to direct inheritance of open sets.
	- Every closed subspace $Y$ of compact space $X$ is compact. This can be shown by adding $X-Y$ into the covering.
	- **Every compact subspace $Y$ of Hausdorff space $X$ is closed**: we only need to show that $X-Y$ is open, which is obvious using Hausdorff condition and compactness.
- **Image under continuous map**: image of compact subspace $Y$ under a continuous function is compact.
	- Let $f:X\to Y$ be continuous bijection. If $X$ is compact and $Y$ is Hausdorff, then $f$ is homeomorphism.
	- Let $f:X\to Y$ where $Y$ is compact Hausdorff, then $f$ is continuous iff the graph of $f$ $$G_f=\set{x\times f(x):x\in X}$$is closed in $X\times Y$.
- **Closed set criterion**: a collection $\mathcal C$ of closed set is said to have **finite intersection property** if intersection of any finite sub-collection is non-empty. A topological space $X$ is compact iff for every collection $\mathcal C$ with finite intersection property, the intersection $\bigcap_{C\in\mathcal C}C$ is non-empty.
- For simply ordered set $X$ having the least upper bound property, in the order topology each closed interval is compact.
- **Tychonoff theorem**: product of any collection of compact spaces $X=\prod X_\alpha$ is compact w.r.t product topology.
  **Proof**: given any collection of closed sets $\mathcal A\in\mathcal P(X)$ denote $\mathfrak A$ the collection of subsets of $\mathcal P(X)$ that contains $\mathcal A$ and only closed subsets, and has finite intersection property, and let $\subsetneq$ be the strict partial order in $\mathfrak A$. It can be shown that conditions of Zorn's lemma ([[Order]]) are satisfied, thus there is a maximal element in $\mathfrak A$, which we'll denote as $\mathcal D$. Now for any $\alpha\in J$ consider $\set{\pi_\alpha(D):D\in\mathcal D}$. It has finite intersection property, and by compactness of $X_\alpha$ there exists $x_\alpha\in X_\alpha$ such that  $$x_\alpha\in\bigcap_{D\in\mathcal D}\overline{\pi_\alpha(D)}$$let $x=(x_\alpha)_{\alpha\in J}$, then it suffice to show $x\in\overline D,\forall D\in\mathcal D$. Given any subbasis element $\pi_\beta^{-1}(U_\beta)$ containing $x$, since $x_\beta\in\overline{\pi_\beta(D)}$, $U_\beta$ intersects with $\pi_\beta(D)$ in some $\pi_\beta(y)$ where $y\in D$, then $y\in\pi_\beta^{-1}(U_\beta)\cap D$. This means $\pi_\beta^{-1}(U_\beta)$ intersects with every element of $\mathcal D$, and by maximality we have $\pi_\beta^{-1}(U_\beta)\in\mathcal D$. Since $\mathcal D$ is also closed under finite intersection, this inclusion spreads to every basis element, hence $x\in D,\forall D\in\mathcal D$.
	- **Main idea**: there are three main ideas behind the above proof:
	  1. **Choose closed set criterion**: it's quite easy to prove the result on finite product using open cover definition, but this is hard to be generalized to arbitrary product. In contrast, definition via closed set provides more freedom.
	  2. **Force "good" choice by expansion**: it's easily seen that under some example $x_i\in X_i$ can be chosen "badly" s.t. $(x_1,\cdots)$ is not in $\prod X_i$. To avoid this bad choice we impose more constraint by adding new elements into the collection of closed sets.
	  3. **Extreme case**: following 2, one key idea is to directly pick the largest possible expansion, and check whether it makes the idea work.
- **Sequential compactness**: $(X,\mathcal T)$ is sequentially compact if every sequence of points in $X$ has a convergent subsequence converging to a point in $X$.
## Countability axiom
- **First countability**: a space is said to have a **countable basis** at $x$ if there is a countable collection $\mathcal B$ of neighborhoods of $x$ s.t. each neighborhood contains at least one $B\in\mathcal B$. A space is **first-countable** if it has a countable basis at each point.
- **Second countability**: if a space has a countable basis for its topology, then it's said to be **second-countable**.
	- **Lindelöf space**: for second-countable $X$, every open covering has a countable sub-covering. Space with such property is called Lindelöf space, which is weaker than second countability
	- **Dense subset**: second-countable $X$ has a countable senes subset, by picking one point from each of the basis element.
In general, second-countability is way more stronger than first-countability, and even not all metric space satisfy it, say, $\mathbb R$ induced by discrete metric $d(x,y)=1-\delta_{xy}$.
- Both countability axioms are preserved under taking subspace and product space.
## Baire space
A topological space $(X,\mathcal T)$ is a **Baire space** if it satisfies any of the following conditions: 
1. Every countable union of closed nowhere dense sets has empty interior.
2. Every countable intersection of dense open sets is dense.
3. Every Baire first category set has empty interior
Here we classify subsets of $C$ into two different classes:
- **Meagre (Baire first category)**: $A\subset X$ is meagre if it's a countable union of nowhere dense set.
	- **Comeagre**: $A\subset X$ is comeagre if $X\backslash A$ is meagre.
- **Non-meagre (Baire second category)**: $B\subset X$ is non-meagre if it contains a countable intersection of open dense sets.
Note that a subset of $X$ is either a meagre or a non-meagre.