Let $\set{(X_\alpha,\mathcal T_\alpha)}_{\alpha \in J}$ be an indexed collection of [[Topological Space]], and set $X=\prod_{\alpha\in J}X_\alpha$ ([[Set]]). The **product topology** of $X$ is the initial topology $\mathcal T_X$ ([[Continuous Function]]) on $X$ w.r.t the collection of canonical projections $$\pi=\Set{(\pi_\alpha:X\to X_\alpha):\alpha\in J}$$The product topology is actually the topology induced by pointwise convergence. This makes it the natural setting for theorems regarding limits of functions where uniform convergence is not required.
- **Characterization via subbasis**: $\mathcal T_X$ can be defined as the topology generated by the subbasis $$\mathcal{S} = \Set{ \pi_\alpha^{-1}(U_\alpha) : \alpha \in J, U_\alpha\in\mathcal T_\alpha}$$Equivalence follows from definition of [[Continuous Function]]. 
- **Basis**: a common choice of basis for $\mathcal{T}_X$ is the set $$\mathcal B=\Set{\prod_{\alpha \in J} U_\alpha:U_\alpha\in\mathcal T_\alpha,U_\alpha\neq X_\alpha\text{ for finitely many }\alpha}$$We don't allow infinite non-total space since that would make the basis too large to handle properly for us. 
- **Box topology**: the box topology $\mathcal{T}_\text{box}$ is generated by the basis $$\mathcal B_\text{box}=\Set{ \prod_{\alpha \in J} U_\alpha : U_\alpha \in \mathcal{T}_\alpha }$$Note that $\mathcal{T}_X \subseteq \mathcal{T}_\text{box}$. If $J$ is finite, $\mathcal{T}_X = \mathcal{T}_\text{box}$.
	- **Why we prefer product topology**: box topology is usually too fine to be useful or relevant. For instance, let $f:A\to\prod X_\alpha$ be given by $f(a)=(f_\alpha(a))_{\alpha\in J}$, then in product topology $f$ is continuous iff each $f_\alpha$ is continuous, but in box topology $(\Leftarrow)$ is not guaranteed problem, since infinite intersection of open sets may result in a singleton.
- **Continuity criterion**: a function $f: A \to \prod X_\alpha$ is continuous if and only if each component function $f_\alpha = \pi_\alpha \circ f: A \to X_\alpha$ is continuous.
## Properties
We go over some common properties of topological spaces.
- **[[Separation Axioms]]**: for any $i=0,1,2,3$ we have $$X_\alpha\text{ is }T_i,\forall\alpha\imply X\text{ is }T_i$$This can be verified directly. $T_4$, however, is not necessarily preserved. 
- **Connectedness**: if each $X_\alpha$ is connected, then so is $X$.
	- **Path connectedness**: if each $X_\alpha$ is path connected, then so is $X$.
- **Compactness**: is each $X_\alpha$ is compact, then so is $X$. 
- **Metrizability**: a product $X = \prod X_n$ is metrizable ([[Metric Topology]]) if and only if each $X_n$ is metrizable and the index set is at most countable. If $d_n$ are metrics for $X_n$ bounded by $1$, a common choice of metric for the product is $$D(x, y) = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{d_n(x_n, y_n)}{2^n}$$