**Why is FT special**: the Fourier modes $e^{2\pi i\xi x}$ are eigenfunctions of key operators we care about, like translation, dilation, [[Integration & Differentiation]], etc.. These operators governing fields like PDE and harmonic analysis, are **translation-invariant linear operators**, and exponentials are exactly the characters of the translation group. This is why the FT **diagonalizes** them, and the property of diagonalization is key to simplify the problem to a large extent.

**Remark**: in this note we first define FT on Schwartz space, and then extend it to the $L^2$ space using density argument, via a basic result on operator extension. It's worth noting that this logic flow is different from what we do in [[FT on L1]], where more complicated tricks and lemmas from elementary calculus are used.

---
All discussion in this section will be restricted to the [[Schwartz Space]] $\mathcal S(\mathbb R^d)$.
We denote FT as $\mathcal F$, given by $$\hat f(\xi)=\mathcal Ff(\xi)=\int_{\mathbb R^d}f(x)e^{-2\pi i\xi x}dx,\quad f(x)=\int_{\mathbb R^d}\hat f(\xi)e^{2\pi i\xi x}d\xi$$Note that on $\mathcal S$ the inversion formula is a strict equality.
- **Discussion**: FT is defined by testing the given $f$ by characters $e^{2\pi i\xi x}$ ([[Distribution]]), and these functions happen to be eigenfunctions of translation. Since (in principle) two commuting linear operators are **simultaneously diagonalizable** ([[Spectral Theorem]]), it's expected that $\mathcal F$ would also diagonalize those that commutes with translation, including integration, differentiation, and other operators mentioned in the next section.
## Properties
- **Translation & dilation**: $f(x+h)\mapsto\hat f(\xi)e^{2\pi ih\xi},f(x)e^{-2\pi ixh}\mapsto\hat f(\xi +h)$, and $f(\delta x)\mapsto\delta^{-1}\hat f(\delta^{-1}h)$, by change of variable. 
	- **Intuition**: a translation on $f$ leads to a uniform shift in initial angle, hence yielding a corrective multiplier in its FT. Similarly for dilation the angle is uniformly dilated rather than shifted.
- **Differentiation**: $f'(x)\mapsto2\pi i\xi\hat f(\xi)$ and $-2\pi ixf(x)\mapsto\frac{d}{d\xi}\hat f(\xi)$, or more generally $$D^\alpha f(x)\mapsto(2\pi i\xi)^\alpha\hat f(\xi),\quad(-2\pi ix)^\alpha f(x)\mapsto D^\alpha\hat f(\xi)$$which follows from [[Differentiation Under the Integral Sign]].
- **Rotation**: $f(Rx)\mapsto\hat f(Rx)$ by change of variable and the fact that $|\det R|=1$.
- **Multiplication formula**: for $f,g\in\mathcal S$ by Fubini's theorem we have $$\int f\hat g=\int\hat f g$$Notice that this can also be derived directly using results from [[Integral Calculus on Euclidean Space]] in the [[Riemann Integral]] settings.
- **Inversion formula**: the inversion formula holds for all $f\in\mathcal S$.
  **Proof**: it suffices to show $f(0)=\int\hat f$ by translation property. By multiplication formula $$\int fK_\delta=\int\hat f G_\delta\quad\text{where}\quad K_\delta=\delta^{-1/2}e^{-\pi \delta^{-1}x^2},G_\delta = e^{-\pi\delta x^2},\widehat{G_\delta}=K_\delta$$Since $\set{K_\delta}$ is a family of good kernels ([[Convolution]]), LHS goes to $f(0)$ as $\delta\to0$, while RHS obviously tends to $\int\hat f$. This completes the proof.
- **Plancherel formula**: for $f\in\mathcal S$ we have $\|\hat f\|_2=\|f\|_2$.
  **Proof**: denote $h=f(x)*\overline{f(-x)}$, then by property of $\mathcal F$ we have $$\hat h=|\hat f|^2,\quad h(0)=\int|f|^2$$since $f\in\mathcal S$ we have $\overline{f(-x)}\in\mathcal S$, hence $h\in\mathcal S$. Now the inversion formula yields the result.
	- **Alternative proof**: we can also substitute $g=\hat f$ directly into the multiplication formula to derive the result. Of course this also relies also the inversion formula.
- **Poisson summation formula**: for $f\in\mathcal S$ we have $$\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}f(x+n)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}\hat f(n)e^{2\pi inx}$$Specifically we have $\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}f(n)=\sum_{n\in\mathbb N}\hat f(n)$.
  **Proof**: by [[Fourier Series]] it suffices to show that two sides have the same Fourier coefficients. This can be done by a simple interchange of sum and integral.
	- **Alternative proof**: with the delta train $\Shah$ defined in [[Special Function Gallery]] notice that $$\sum_{n\in\mathbb Z}f(x+n)=(f*\Shah)(x)=\mathcal F^{-1}\circ\mathcal F(f*\Shah)(x)=\left(\mathcal F^{-1}(\mathcal F f\cdot\mathcal F\Shah)\right)(x) $$where we used the convolution theorem for the last equality. Notice that the last term is exactly the RHS in the desired result, hence we complete the proof.
- **[[Convolution]] theorem**: for $f,g\in\mathcal S$ we have $\mathcal F(f*g)=\mathcal Ff\cdot\mathcal Fg$.
  **Proof**: consider $\Phi(u,x)=f(x-u)g(u)e^{-2\pi i\xi x}$. Obviously $\Phi\in\mathcal S$, hence integrable on $\mathbb R^2$, then by Fubini's theorem ([[Lebesgue Integral]]) we have $$\int_\mathbb R\left(\int_\mathbb R\Phi(u,x) du\right)dx=\int_\mathbb R\left(\int_\mathbb R\Phi(u,x) dx\right)du$$which can be simplified into the desired result by change of variable.
### FT as an [[Operator]]
**Unitarity**: $\mathcal F$ is a unitary [[Operator]] on $\mathcal S$ under the $L^2$ norm ([[Lp Space]]).
**Proof**: by the differentiation property we know that $\mathcal F(\mathcal S)\subset\mathcal S$, and the inversion formula shows that it's a bijection. Unitarity can be seen from the Plancherel formula
- **Eigenspace**: since $\mathcal F^4=I$, all eigenvalues of $\mathcal F$ are $\set{a,i,-1,-i}$. We already know that $e^{-\pi x^2}$ is an eigenfunction corresponding to $1$. By differentiating $g(x)=e^{-\pi x^2}$ three times we can find the eigenfunctions corresponding to other eigenvalues, listed below: $$\mathcal Fg=g,\quad\mathcal F(g'''+3\pi g')=i(g''+3\pi g'),\quad\mathcal F(\pi g+g'')=-(\pi g+g'')\quad\mathcal Fg'=-ig'$$using these as basis we can construct other eigenfunctions.
---
## FT on $L^2$
FT on $L^2$ is defined as the (unique) extension of [[FT on L2]]. 
**Theorem**: Denote $\mathcal F_0$ the FT on $\mathcal S(\mathbb R^d)$, then it has a unique extension $\mathcal F\in\mathcal L(L^2)$ that is unitary. The essential idea is to show first that $\mathcal S$ is dense in $L^2$, then use the general extension principle to construct the $\mathcal F$.
**Proof**: by [[Lp Space#Properties]] $\mathcal S$ is dense in $L^2$. Now we can extends $\mathcal F_0$ to $\mathcal F$ by taking $$\mathcal H_1=\mathcal H_2=L^2(\mathbb R^d),\mathcal S=\mathcal S(\mathbb R^d),T_0=\mathcal F_0$$as discussed in [[Operator]]. To show that $\mathcal F$ is unitary we only need to extends $\mathcal F_0^{-1}$ is the same fashion, and notice that $$f_n=\mathcal F_0^{-1}\mathcal F_0 f_n=\mathcal F_0\mathcal F_0^{-1}f_n\quad\Longrightarrow\quad f=\mathcal F^{-1}\mathcal Ff_=\mathcal F\mathcal F^{-1}f$$hence $\mathcal F$ is invertible and preserves norm, which means it's unitary.
- The proof of density also shows that given $f\in L^1\cap L^2$ there exists $\set{f_n}\in\mathcal S$ s.t. $f_n\to f$ in both $L^1,L^2$ norm, since pointwise convergence ensures convergence in all $L^p$ norm.
### Properties
Most properties (differentiation, integration, rotation, etc.) above generalize to this case, with basically the same proof. Properties with necessary extra proof are listed below.
- **$L^2$ approximation**: assuming that $f,g\in L^2$, for $E$ measurable we have that $$\underset{\supp \hat g\subset E}{\arg\min}\|f-g\|_2=\int\hat f(\xi)\chi_E(\xi)e^{2\pi i\xi x}d\xi$$since by linearity of $\mathcal F$ ([[FT on L2]]) we have that $$\|f-g\|_2=\|\mathcal F(f-g)\|_2=\|\hat f-\hat g\|_2\le\|\hat f-\hat f\chi_E\|_2,\quad\forall\supp\hat g\subset E$$This can be seen as a generalization to the Bessel's inequality for [[Basis in Hilbert Space]].
- **Convolution theorem**: for $f,g\in L^2$ we have $\mathcal F(f*g)=\mathcal Ff\cdot\mathcal Fg$.
  **Proof**: since $\mathcal S$ is dense in $L^2$, we can pick $f_n\to f,g_n\to g$ in $L^2$. It suffices to show that $$\mathcal F^{-1}(\mathcal Ff\cdot\mathcal Fg)=f*g$$Notice that $(f,g)\mapsto f*g$ is continuous from $L^2\times L^2$ to $L^\infty$, $(f,g)\mapsto\mathcal F f\cdot\mathcal Fg$ is continuous from $L^2\times L^2$ to $L^1$, and $\mathcal F^{-1}$ is continuous from $L^1$ to $L^\infty$ ([[FT on L1]]). Hence density argument yields the theorem.
