The **direct product** of two [[Group]] $G$ and $H$, denoted $G \times H$, is the group consisting of ordered pairs $(g,h)$ where $g \in G$ and $h \in H$, with $(g_1,h_1) \cdot (g_2,h_2) = (g_1g_2, h_1h_2)$. A direct product allows the combination of two groups into a larger structure where both original groups retain their individual properties.
- $G_i\cong\{(1,1,\cdots,1,g_i,1,\cdots,1)|g_i\in G_i\}$, and $G/G_i\cong\prod_{j\neq i}G_j$.
- For direct product factor groups commutes with each other, thus normal in the product. This is also why we use $\ltimes,\rtimes$ to represents semidirect product, with the open side pointing at the normal subgroup. 
- **Recognizing Direct Products**:
    - **Recognition Theorem**: A group $G$ can be expressed as an internal direct product of subgroups $A$ and $B$ if $G = AB$ (every element of $G$ can be written as a product of elements from $A$ and $B$), and $A \cap B = {e}$. This allows us to decompose groups into simpler components.
	    - If $G=N_1\cdots N_s$ for normal subgroups $N_i$, and for each $x\in G$, the expression $x=x_1\cdots x_n(x_i\in N_i)$ is unique, then $G\cong\prod N_i$.
    - **Internal vs. External Direct Product**: An **internal direct product** is when subgroups within the same group combine to form the whole group, whereas an **external direct product** involves two independent groups forming a new group through their product.
> [!info] Direct product decomposition and composition series
> In composition series, the “building blocks” of $G$ are combined in a **“hierarchical” or “extension”** structure. A group constructed from a composition series is formed through a sequence of extensions, where each step in the series builds on the structure of the previous one. [[Solvable Group]]
> In direct product, components are “parallel” and act independently. This is fundamentally different from composition series.
> Even though the composition series provides unique factors (up to isomorphism and permutation, by the Jordan-Hölder theorem), it does not uniquely determine a direct product structure for the group. In fact, most groups do not decompose into direct products of simple groups due to their nontrivial interaction (extensions) between factors.
- **Cyclic group decomposition**: for $(m,n)=1$, we have $C_m\times C_n\cong C_{mn}$, because $C_m\times C_n$ contains an element of order $mn$, and the subgroup generated by it is isomorphic to $C_{mn}$. The order of two groups yields the result. For more, see [[Group Gallery]].
	- Another proof is to explicitly show the isomorphism:$$\phi:C_m\times C_n\to C_{mn},\quad\phi(a,b)=na+mb$$
## Finitely generated abelian group
We introduce two forms of the **fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian group**.
1. **Primary decomposition**: any finitely generated abelian $G$ with free rank $r$ ([[Group]]) can be uniquely (up to isomorphism) written as $$G\cong \mathbb Z^r\times \mathbb Z/q_1\mathbb Z\times\cdots\times\mathbb Z/q_k\mathbb Z$$where $q_i$ are powers of (not necessarily distinct) primes. 
2. **Invariant factor decomposition**: any finitely generated abelian $G$ with free rank $r$ can be uniquely (up to isomorphism) written as $$G \cong \mathbb{Z}^{r} \times\mathbb{Z}/n_1\mathbb Z \times\cdots \times \mathbb{Z}/n_k\mathbb Z,\quad n_{i+1}\mid n_i,\forall i$$where $n_i$ are called invariant factors.
**Proof**: we prove the first assertion, then the second assertion follows easily as an equivalent statement. By [[Group]] and definition we consider its smallest set of generator $$G=\braket{t_1,\cdots t_r,g_1,\cdots,g_s}\quad\text{with}\quad\quad s+r=\rank G\quad\Longrightarrow\quad |t_i|=\infty,\quad|g_j|<\infty$$now by definition of [[Free Group]] we have $$G\cong\mathbb Z^r\times\braket{g_1,\cdots g_s}$$Denote $G_t=\braket{g_1,\cdots,g_s}$ the torsion subgroup, which is a finite group by construction, then via induction on the number of prime factors of $|G_t|$ we can reduce to problem to showing that:
- **Abelian group factored by prime**: we wanna establish the implication that $$|G|=mp^n,\quad p\not\mid m\quad\Longrightarrow\quad G=H\times K\quad\text{with}\quad H=\set{x\in G:x^{p^n}=e},\quad K=\set{x\in G:x^m=e}$$and further we have $|H|=p^n$. Obviously it suffices to show that $G=HK,H\cap K=\set{e}$. By Bézout's identity ([[Polynomial]]) we can pick $a,b\in\mathbb N$ with $ap^n+bm=1$, hence $$x=x^{ap^n+bm}=x^{ap^n}\cdot x^{bm},\quad\forall x\in G$$while it's easy to verify that $x^{ap^n}\in K,x^{bm}\in H$, hence $G=HK$. The second result is direct, hence the proof of the first half is complete. For $|H|=p^n$ it suffices to show that $p\not\mid |K|$, and this is also obvious via Cauchy's theorem ([[Sylow's Theorems]]).
- **Uniqueness of the above factorization**: denote the factorization of $|G|$ as $$|G|=\prod_{i=1}^kp_i^{n_i}$$we use induction on $k$ to establish uniqueness. For $k=1$ the result is trivial, and assuming validity of $k-1$ we first apply the above factorization to $G$, and then invoke the induction assumption to conclude that $$G=H_1\times\prod_{i=2}^k H_i$$since each $H_i$ is a normal Sylow $P$-subgroup, by third [[Sylow's Theorems]] it's unique.
- **Abelian group of prime-power order factored into cyclic groups**: we use induction on $n$ in $|G|=p^n$ to show that $G$ can be factored into $$G=\braket{a}\times K$$where $a$ is an element of maximal order. The result for $p=1$ is trivial, and assuming validity of $n-1$, we pick $a\in G$ with the largest possible order $|a|=p^j$. Now consider $$H=\braket{a}$$if $G\neq H$ we can pick $b\in G$ with the property that $$|c|<|b|\quad\Longrightarrow\quad c\in\braket{a}\quad\text{while}\quad b\notin\braket{a}$$this is possible by picking $b$ as the element with the lowest order in $G-\braket{a}$. Now we can prove by contradiction that $\braket{a}\cap\braket{b}=\set{e}$, and on the quotient group $G/\braket{b}$ the induction assumption can be applied to yield $\overline G=\braket{\overline a}\times\overline K$, and finally we can recover decomposition of $G$ via pullback of the quotient map.
## Semidirect product
A **semidirect product** is a generalization of the direct product. It includes **inner semidirect product** and **outer semidirect product**, although both are commonly referred to simply as semidirect product. Generally, for $N\triangleleft G,H\le G$, if $G=NH,N\cap H=\{1\}$, then we define the semidirect product as $G=H\ltimes N$, and say that $G$ **splits** over $N$.
A great example worth mentioning is [[Group Gallery#Affine group of $Z_n$]].
- **Inner semidirect Product**: given subgroups $N,H$ as above and the inner homomorphism $$\phi: H \to \mathrm{Aut}(N),\quad\phi_h(n)=hnh^{-1}$$the inner semidirect product $N \rtimes_\phi H$ is defined by the set $N \times H$ with the operation $$(n_1, h_1) \cdot (n_2, h_2) = (n_1 \phi_{h_1}(n_2), h_1 h_2)$$For such group we have $G\cong N\rtimes_\phi H$.
    - This product is used to construct non-abelian groups and is a key tool in group theory, especially in understanding extensions of groups. [[Group]]
- **Outer semidirect product**: given any groups $N,H$ and a homomorphism $\phi:H\to\mathrm{Aut}(N)$, the outer semidirect product is defined on $N\times H$ with the group operation $\bullet$:$$\bullet:(N \rtimes_\phi H) \times (N \rtimes_\phi H)\to N \rtimes_\phi H,\quad(n_1, h_1) \bullet (n_2, h_2) =(n_1\phi_{h_1}(n_2),\, h_1 h_2)$$
	- Let $N'=(n,1_H),H'=(1_N,h)$, then we have the inner semidirect product $$N\rtimes_\phi H\cong N'H',\quad N'\cap H'=(1_N,1_H)$$we can further verify that $N'$ is normal in the product. Thus outer semidirect product is essentially "the same as" inner semidirect product up to isomorphism.
	- We have $$Z(N\rtimes_\phi H)=\Set{(n,h)|n\in Z(N),\phi_h(n)=n,\forall h\in H,\text{ and }h\in Z(H)\cap\ker\phi}$$thus $N\rtimes_\phi H$ is abelian iff $N,H$ are abelian and $\phi$ is the trivial homomorphism.
## Wreath product
Let $A$ be a group and $H$ a group acting on set $\Omega$. Let $A^\Omega=\prod_{\omega\in\Omega}A$, the direct product of $|\Omega|$ copies of $A$. Consider the group operation given by pointwise multiplication. The action of $H$ on $\Omega$ can be extended to an action on $A^\Omega$ by reindexing, namely by defining $$h\cdot(a_{\omega})_{\omega \in \Omega}:=(a_{h^{-1} \cdot \omega})_{\omega\in\Omega}$$for all $h \in H$ and all $(a_{\omega})_{\omega \in \Omega} \in A^{\Omega}$. Now we define the **Wreath product** as $$A\operatorname{Wr}_\Omega H=A^\Omega\rtimes H$$with the action given above. The subgroup $A^\Omega$ is called the **base** of the wreath product. Usually we have $\Omega=H$, in which case we call it a **regular Wreath product**. Note that Wreath product is sometimes denoted as $A\wr_\Omega H$.
- $|A\wr_\Omega H|=|A|^{|\Omega|}|H|$.