Given a nonempty set ([[Set Theory]]) $\Omega$, its **symmetric group** is the tuple $(S_\Omega,\circ)$ where $$S_\Omega=\set{(f:\Omega\to\Omega):f\text{ is a bijection}}$$which forms a [[Group]] under the operation of composition. We sometimes denote it as $\Sigma(\Omega)$. Notice that given $\phi:\Omega\to\Delta$ bijective we have $S_\Omega\cong S_\Delta$ with bijection $\phi$ defined as $$\phi_\theta(\sigma)=\theta\circ\sigma\circ\theta^{-1},\quad\forall\sigma\in S_\Omega$$Therefore we can further abbreviate it as $S_n$. The element $\sigma\in S_n$ is called a **permutation**. 
- **Discussion**: symmetric group is one of the most central object in [[Group]] for several reasons:
	- **Pure combinatorial definition**: the definition of $S_\Omega$ is purely combinatorial, representing "symmetry" in the most abstract, naked form. This makes is cleaner compared to other objects like the [[Matrix Group]] or Lie group ([[Lie Algebra]]), which forces us to also pay attention to their topological/arithmetic properties. 
	- **Simple representation**: the permutations can be represented by its cycle notation, and the calculation are also quite straightforward, making it handy in many cases.
	- **Universality**: by Cayley's theorem ([[Group Action]]) any finite group can be embedded into its symmetric group. Such universality enables it to be applicable in many problems. 
  Historically, it's initially investigated due to the need of searching for an algebraic solution formula to a higher order equation (see [[History of Algebra]]). 
- **Support**: for $\sigma\in S_n$ we define its support as $$\supp\sigma=\set{j:\sigma(j)\neq j}$$When $\supp(\sigma)\cap\supp(\tau)=\varnothing$ we say that $\sigma,\tau$ are **disjoint**. 
	- **Commutativity of disjoint permutations**: we have the equivalence $$\supp\sigma\cap\supp\tau=\varnothing\qiffq\sigma\tau=\tau\sigma$$in which case we can also easily verify that $$\quad\supp(\sigma\tau)=\supp(\sigma)\cup supp(\tau),\quad|\sigma\tau|=\lcm(|\sigma|,|\tau|)$$
- **Conjugate class**: for any $k$-cycle $\psi=(i_1,\cdots,i_k)$ and $\beta\in S_n$, we have $$\beta\psi\beta^{-1}=(\beta(i_1),\cdots,\beta(i_k))$$Thus the $\cl(\psi)=\{\phi\in S_n:\phi\text{ is k-cycle}\}$. Further, for any $\sigma\in S_n$, we have $$\cl(\sigma)=\{\tau\in S_n:\tau\text{ have same number of k-cycles as }\tau,\forall k\}$$
- **Generator**: the symmetric group can be generated with $n-1$ transpositions or one transposition together with a $n$-cycle:$$S_n=\langle(1,2,\cdots,n),(1,2)\rangle=\langle(1,2),(1,3),\cdots,(1,n)\rangle=\langle(1,2), (2,3),\cdots,(n-1,n)\rangle$$Note that for an arbitrary $\tau=(a,b)$, $S_n=\langle(1,\cdots,n),\tau\rangle$ iff $(b-a,n)=1$. This can be shown by considering in what case can all transpositions $(1,k)$ be generated by $(1,\cdots,n)^{-k}\tau(1,\cdots,n)^k$.
- **Automorphism on symmetric group**: we have $$\aut(S_n)=\inn(S_n)\cong S_n$$this can be shown by looking only at the generators $(i,i+1)$, combined with the fact that automorphism preserves order.
## Canonical cycle notation
By pairing the elements before and after the action of $\sigma\in S_n$ we have the **two-line notation** $$\sigma=\begin{pmatrix}1&2&\cdots&n\\\sigma(1)&\sigma(2)&\cdots&\sigma(n)\end{pmatrix}$$Within this table a **cycle** is a string of integers representing a cyclic permutation. Decomposing $\sigma$ into its orbits ([[Group Action]]) we get the **canonical cycle notation (decomposition)** $$\sigma=(a_1,\cdots,a_{l_1})\cdots(a_{m_{k-1}+1},\cdots,a_{l_k})\where\sum_{i=1}^kl_i=n$$Note that in practice $1$-cycle is conventionally neglected. 
- **Cycle type**: the $\sigma$ defined above in cycle notation is of (cycle) type $(l_1,\cdots,l_k)$. In general a cycle type is the multi-index consisting of all the cycle length of its cycle decomposition 
- **Order of permutation**: the order of $\sigma$ of type $(l_1,\cdots,l_k)$ is $$|\sigma|=\lcm(l_1,\cdots,l_k)$$This can be verified easily by induction on $k$. 
## Alternating group
The sign of $\sigma\in S_n$ is defined as $$\sgn\sigma=\prod_{(i,j)}\frac{\sigma(i)-\sigma(j)}{i-j}$$it can be shown that $sng(\sigma\tau)=sgn(\sigma)sgn(\tau)$. we now define the **alternating group** as $$A_n=\ker\sgn=\set{\sigma\in S_n:\sigma\text{ is even permutation}}$$
- It can be easily shown (by consider the transposition generators) that $sgn$ is the only surjective homomorphism from $S_n$ to $\{1,-1\}$. This, to some extent, verifies the uniqueness of [[Determinant]] as an alternating multilinear function.
- **Extending Cayley's theorem**: for any $n$, $S_n$ is isomorphic to a subgroup of $A_{n+2}$ (the isomorphism can be constructed with a natural projection and the last to entries for adjusting the sign). Thus any group $G$ is isomorphic to a subgroup of $A_{|G|+2}$. 
- **Generator**: $A_n$ is generated by all $3$-cycles or permutations of type $(2,2)$.
	- **Proof**
	  1. $1=(123)(132)$.
	  2. For any $\tau\in A_n\subset S_n$, we can decompose it into transpositions $\tau=\prod_1^r\sigma_k$. $r$ is even since $\tau$ is even, thus we can separate them into $r/2$ pairs.
	  3. Any $\sigma_k\sigma_{k+1}$ can be written as product of two $3$-cycles. This complete the proof.
- **Simplicity of $A_n$ for $n\ge5$**: the key idea is that, it's possible to construct a $3$-cycle using elements form any conjugacy class.
	- **Proof 1: directly showing that ay $N\triangleleft G$ contains the generator of $A_n$**. 
	  1. **$A_n\triangleleft S_n$ is the only normal subgroup**: for a specific $\sigma\in N\triangleleft G$, we can pick a $\sigma(i)\neq i$ and $j\neq\sigma(i)$. Now let $\tau=(ij)$, then we have $$\sigma\tau\sigma^{-1}\tau^{-1}=(\sigma(i)\sigma(j))(ij)$$which is either a $3$-cycle or a permutation of type $(2,2)$. By the generator of $A_n$ and the property of conjugacy class, we know that $A_n\subset N$. By Lagrange's theorem $A_n$ is the only normal subgroup.
	  2. Transitivity of normality directly yields the result.
	- **Proof 2: Proof by reducing to simple case**.
	  1. **Group $A_6$ is simple**: this can be directly checked by looking at its conjugacy classes.
	  2. **$N\triangleleft G$ contains $3$-cycle**: for $\sigma(1)=i\neq1$ (we can obtain this by relabeling), let $\tau=(ijk)$, then $\tau\sigma\tau^{-1}=\tau(\sigma(1))\neq\sigma(1)$, so $\phi=\tau\sigma\tau^{-1}\sigma^{-1}\neq1$. Notice that $$\phi=(\tau\sigma\tau^{-1})\sigma^{-1}\in N,\quad\phi=\tau(\sigma\tau^{-1}\sigma^{-1})\text{ is product of two 3-cycles}$$Now let $H$ be the copy of $A_6$ within $A_n$ (may be augmented if number of elements involved is less than $6$), then $H\cap N$ is nontrivial and normal. However $H\cong A_6$ is simple, thus $H\cap N=H\Rightarrow H\subset N$, which means $N$ contains a $3$-cycle.