## Parameter cancelation
When trying to find a complicated object (curve or surface) instead of directly calculating the desired expression it makes sense to first find a set of equations which the points of interest must satisfy, and then mange to cancel the parameters out to find the desired expression.
Overall the key steps goes as follows: 
1. **Parametrization**: find a element that belongs to the target object, and parametrize it.
2. **Cancelation**: find equations the element must satisfies, and cancel the parameters out.
Note that for the same problem there are usually multiples ways to set parameters, yielding different paths of computation and different efforts required. In general there are some rules of thumb we can follow when deciding which parameters to choose:
- **First order parameter first**: prioritize first order parameters, i.e., those that can be explicitly calculated via **only one or two algebraic manipulations** from known conditions, or those that can **directly yield the target expression**.
	- **If a point is fixed, parametrize the directions**: when a point is given and we're asked to calculate somethings related to it (say, the cone consisting of all tangent lines of a surface passing through this point), consider parametrizing the direction of the line. This is illustrated by the first worked example below.
	- **To find the plane of tangent points, parametrize the tangent points**: in the first worked example below, we parametrize the tangent point as $(x_t,y_t,z_t)$ and translate tangency into orthogonality relation $$(x_t-x_0,y_t-y_0,z_t-z_0)\cdot(2x_t,2y_t,-2z_t)=0$$This can be easily cancelled out from the equation of the surface.
	- **Counterexample**: if in the first example above we use the parametrization in the second example then the algebraic expressions would be a lot more messier, and the process of cancellation, while feasible, is also more complicated.
- **Exploit symmetry**: when there is a natural center/axis/vertex, etc., we should use translation or other forms of transformation to remove linear or constant terms and turn the object into a homogeneous expression, considerably simplifying algebra.
- **Think in linear algebra terms**: utilizing things like [[Matrix]] or [[Quadratic Form]] could possibly make the overall computation cleaner, but this is not that common compared to the previous techniques. 
### Worked examples
- **Tangent cone**: take $S:x^2+y^2-z^2+2=0$ and $M_0(1,1,-1)$, then to find the cone $\Sigma$ consisting of tangent lines of $S^+$ passing $M_0$ we could consider the parametrization $$L:(x,y,z)=(1,1,-1)+t(l,m,n),\quad t\in\mathbb R$$by substituting $L$ into $S$ we get a quadratic equation about $t$, hence we must have $$\Delta=0\quad\Longrightarrow\quad4(l+m+n)^2-12(l^2+m^2-n^2)=0$$which is homogeneous. Now again substitute $L$ into the above equation we get $\Sigma$.
- **Intersection of tangent surfaces**: following the first example, to find the plane in which $S^+\cap\Sigma$ lies we also consider to take $(x_0,y_0,z_0)\in S$ and write the tangent plane as ([[Surface]]) $$\nabla S\cdot(P-P_0)=0\quad\text{where}\quad P_0(x_0,y_0,z_0)\in S,P(x,y,z)$$taking $P=M_0$ yields an equation about $P_0$, and when combined with $S$, yields the desired plane equation.
- **Cone containing three pairwise tangent lines**: a cone taking the origin as apex, i.e., $$\Gamma:a_{11}x^2+a_{22}y^2+a_{33}z^2+2a_{12}xy+2a_{23}yz+2a_{13}xz=0$$then it contains three pairwise tangent lines iff $a_{11}+a_{22}+a_{33}=0$.
  **Proof**: consider the matrix form $$\Gamma:\begin{bmatrix}x&y&z\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}a_{11}&a_{12}&a_{13}\\a_{21}&a_{22}&a_{23}\\a_{31}&a_{32}&a_{33}\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\\z\end{bmatrix}=0$$Denote $P$ the matrix consisting of three vectors that are pairwise tangent, then by the fact that trace is invariant under matrix similarity we have that $\tr([a_{ij}])=\tr(P[a_{ij}]P^*)=0$. Conversely given $\tr([a_{ij}])=0$ the three vectors can be constructed explicitly.
## Vector method
Several useful formulas can be found in [[Euclidean Vector]]. 
The key to this method is that, by utilizing definition and properties of vectors we may somehow transform a geometry problem in to a purely algebraic one.