An $n$-th order linear differential equation is of the form $$Lx=f(t)\quad\text{where}\quad L= a_n(t)\frac{d^n}{dt^n} + a_{n-1}(t)\frac{d^{n-1}y}{dt^{n-1}} + \cdots+a_0(t)$$Here $L$ is referred to as a **linear differential operator**. 
- **Existence and uniqueness theorem**: If the functions $a_0, a_1, \cdots, a_n, f$ are continuous on some interval $I$, and $a_n(t) \neq 0$ for all $t$ in $I$, then for any initial conditions $$x^{(i)}(t_0) =x^{(i)}_0,\quad \forall0\le i\le n-1$$there exists a unique solution $x= \phi(t)$ to the IVP. This follows from the Picard-Lindelöf theorem in [[Linear ODE System]], since by setting $x_i=x^{(i-1)}$ we get $$Lx=f\quad\iff\quad x'=Ax+b\quad\text{where}\quad A=\begin{bmatrix}0&1&0&\cdots&0\\0&0&1&\cdots&0\\\vdots&\vdots&\ddots&\ddots&0\\0&0&\cdots&0&1\\-\dfrac{a_0}{a_n}&-\dfrac{a_1}{a_n}&\cdots&\cdots&-\dfrac{a_{n-1}}{a_n}\end{bmatrix},b=\begin{bmatrix}0\\0\\\vdots\\0\\-\dfrac{f}{a_n}\end{bmatrix}$$which turns a higher order linear ODE into a linear system consisting of $n$ functions.
## Fundamental set of solutions
By [[Linear ODE System]] any homogeneous linear ODE of order $n$ has $n$ linearly independent solutions, while for non-homogeneous ODE it's way more complex.
- **Wronskian**: Wronskian (determinant) for a set of functions $\phi_i(t)$ is defined as$$W(\phi_1,\cdots,\phi_n) (t)=\begin{vmatrix}\phi_1&\phi_2&\cdots&\phi_n\\\phi_1' &\phi_2'&\cdots&\phi_n' \\\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\\phi_1^{(n-1)} &\phi_2^{(n-1)} & \cdots &\phi_n^{(n-1)}\end{vmatrix}(t)$$all results from [[Linear ODE System]] can be directly carried over.
	- **Constant coefficients**: given $a_i(t)\equiv c_i\in\mathbb R$, a collection $x_i$ are linearly independent iff the Wronskian is never zero.
	  **Proof**: if there is a set $x_i$ with $W(t_0)=0$, the linear system $\sum c_ix_i^{(k)}(t_0)=0,0\le k\le n-1$ has a non-zero solution $c_i$. Consider $x=\sum c_ix_i$, then $x(t)$ also satisfies the IVP, while $x(t)=0$ obviously satisfies the IVP. By the uniqueness theorem $x(t)=0$, contradicting the linear independency.
- **Abel's identity**: for a set of solutions $x_i$, we have $$W(t)=W(t_0)\exp\left(-\int_{t_0}^t\frac{a_{n-1}(s)}{a_{n}(s)}ds\right)$$this is a special case of Liouville's formula in [[Linear ODE System]].
	- **Sign of Wronskian**: by Abel's identity we know that we either have $W(t)$ either positive, negative, or constantly zero on the interval under discussion.
## Homogeneous equation with constant coefficients
Consider are equations of the form
$$ a_n \frac{d^n x}{dt^n} + a_{n-1} \frac{d^{n-1}x}{dt^{n-1}} + \cdots + a_1 \frac{dx}{dt}+a_0x=0,\quad a_i\in\mathbb R$$
Assuming $x(t) = e^{\lambda t}$ and substituting it into the equation yields the **characteristic polynomial** $$\sum_{i=0}^na_i\lambda^i=0$$By the fundamental theorem of algebra ([[Polynomial]]) there are exactly $n$ roots to this equation, and we can use then to construct the fundamental set of solutions.
- **Unequal roots**: if the roots $\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \dots, \lambda_n$ are real and pairwise distinct, we have $W(e^{\lambda_it})\neq0$ since it contains a Vandermonde [[Determinant]], hence the general solution is$$ x(t)=\sum_{i=1}^nc_ie^{\lambda_it}$$When complex roots $\lambda=\alpha+i\beta$ are involved the corresponding real solution is$$ x(t) = e^{\alpha t}(c_1 \cos(\beta t) + c_2 \sin(\beta t)) $$which is actually a re-parameterization of $c_1e^{\lambda t}+c_2e^{\overline\lambda t}$ to ensure the solution is real.
- **Repeated roots**: for root $r$ with multiplicity $k$, when $\lambda=0$ we have $a_i=0,\forall 0\le i\le k-1$, and $$x_i(t)=t^i,\quad\forall 0\le i\le k-1$$are linearly independent solutions. Otherwise for $\lambda\neq0$ the substituting $y=xe^{-\lambda t}$ turns that for $y$ into $0$, hence the general solutions are of the form$$ x_i(t) =t^ie^{\lambda t},\quad 0\le i\le k$$This is justified by some simple algebraic manipulations.
Note that these results coincide with those obtained in [[Linear ODE System]], if we transform a linear ODE into a linear ODE system of constant coefficients. This is because the [[Characteristic Polynomial]] of $A$ obtained above is exactly $\sum_{i=0}^n a_i\lambda^i=0$, which can be shown by induction using property of [[Determinant]].
**Why such coincidence**: by systemization we're essentially decomposing the process to working out eigenvalues into each Jordan block. To put in another way, finding roots of characteristic equation of $L=\sum_{i=0}^n a_iD^i$ solves the [[Spectrum]] decomposition problem in one go, while systemization realizes decomposition $L=\prod(\lambda I_i-D)$ and finds the eigenvalue for each of them.